


Investment in Upskilling Could Boost Global GDP by $6.5 trillion by 2030 > Press releases | World Economic Forum

































































Agenda


Platforms


Reports


Events


Videos




 English
              

 English
              




English


Español


Français


中文


日本語









Sign In

 







This site uses cookies to deliver website functionality and analytics. If you would like to know more about the types of cookies we serve and how to change your cookie settings, please read our Cookie Notice. By clicking the "I accept" button, you consent to the use of these cookies.

I accept














Agenda


Platforms


Reports


Events


Videos








      English
    


English


Español


Français


中文


日本語








                Sign-in
              





























Media
News Releases

Investment in Upskilling Could Boost Global GDP by $6.5 trillion by 2030







          Published
        
25 Jan 2021



          2021
        

            Share
          











































A World Economic Forum report released today finds that wide-ranging investment in upskilling has the potential to boost GDP by $6.5 trillion by 2030
A year into the Forum’s Reskilling Revolution Initiative it is estimated to have already provided reskilling and upskilling support to more than 50 million people
The initiative has also released a new road map to help make skills the universal currency of the labour market
Learn more here



Geneva, Switzerland, 25 January 2021 — Accelerated investment in upskilling and reskilling of workers could add at least $6.5 trillion to global GDP, create 5.3 million (net) new jobs by 2030 and help develop more inclusive and sustainable economies worldwide. These are the key findings of a World Economic Forum report published today.


The report, Upskilling for Shared Prosperity, authored in collaboration with PwC, finds that accelerated skills enhancement would ensure that people have the experience and skills needed for the jobs created by the Fourth Industrial Revolution – boosting global productivity by 3%, on average, by 2030. The newly created jobs will be those that are complemented and augmented – rather than replaced – by technology.







“Even before COVID-19, the rise of automation and digitization was transforming global job markets, resulting in the very urgent need for large-scale upskilling and reskilling. Now, this need has become even more important. And – as we highlight in our new insight report with the Forum – upskilling is key to stimulating the economic recovery from COVID-19 and creating more inclusive and sustainable economies. To make this happen, greater public-private collaboration will be key. We’re delighted to be part of the Reskilling Revolution platform, which will help foster greater action, collaboration, accountability and progress on this important topic,” said Bob Moritz, Global Chairman, PwC.


One year of impact through the Reskilling Revolution


The research on upskilling supports the work of the Reskilling Revolution platform. Launched at the World Economic Forum Annual Meeting in Davos-Klosters in January 2020, the Reskilling Revolution set out to provide better education, skills and work to one billion people by 2030. In its first year, despite the pandemic and economic downturn, the platform’s initiatives are estimated to have benefitted more than 50 million people globally through rapid reskilling, upskilling and redeployment. 


“Millions of jobs have been lost through the pandemic, while accelerating automation and digitization mean that many are unlikely to return. We need new investments in the jobs of tomorrow, the skills people need for moving into these new roles and education systems that prepare young people for the new economy and society. Initiatives like the Reskilling Revolution hold the key to converting ideas into action and creating the necessary coordination between the public and the private sectors. There is no time to waste,” said Saadia Zahidi, Managing Director, World Economic Forum.


After focusing in 2020 on setting up systems for rapid reskilling and upskilling – particularly vital in the midst of the pandemic – the initiative will continue to scale up its skilling work in its second year, while expanding its work in education, job creating investments and work standards. 


“Investment in job creation, particularly climate-friendly jobs, is key to ensuring a Reskilling Revolution, and concerted action by governments and by business is needed urgently,” said Sharan Burrow, General-Secretary, International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC).


Developing a common language for skills


The absence of a shared language for skills poses a significant obstacle for the reskilling and upskilling agenda. An additional report by the World Economic Forum, also launched today, provides a common taxonomy for skills to help employers, government and learning providers more efficiently match talent to jobs and learning opportunities.


The Building a Common Language for Skills at Work: A Global Taxonomy includes specific definitions and categorizations of skills, creating a common taxonomy for the labour market to adopt, from online training providers and universities to hiring managers in companies and education ministries. It consists of an interactive taxonomy with definitions as well as recommendations for adoption to inform hiring, reskilling and redeployment practices in the workplaces of the future.


More about the Reskilling Revolution



The Reskilling Revolution works through three action tracks: Forum-led initiatives that engage the public and the private sectors in joint initiatives; public-sector and multistakeholder initiatives; and company-led initiatives.
The Closing the Skills Gap country accelerators are developing and implementing national strategies for reskilling and upskilling. Accelerators are active in 10 countries with Georgia, Greece and Turkey having recently established accelerators, and a further six accelerators under discussion. Commitments made by established and planned accelerator countries and their member companies to reskill and upskill their employees are expected to reach up to 47 million individuals.
Comprised of major online learning providers, including Udacity and Coursera, and reaching 200 million learners worldwide, the Forum-led Skills Consortium aims to elevate online learning as an accepted route to employment to provide more opportunities for reskilling, upskilling and redeployment. Building on this success, the Chief Learning Officer Community brings together industry leaders in learning and development to transform workplace learning for 2.9 million employees.
In the year ahead, the Consortium, the community of Chief Human Resources Officers and Chief Learning Officers of the Reskilling Revolution platform will work on the adoption of the skills taxonomy to help make skills the key currency of the labour market and create greater efficiencies in the labour market.
The Preparing for the Future of Work industry accelerators are estimated to have reached nearly 8 million employees to prepare them with future-oriented skills. In addition, the Chief Human Resource Officer Community brings together companies’ HR leaders to share best practices and mobilize action to provide better jobs and skills to a further 4 million employees.
Multistakeholder coalitions that joined the Reskilling Revolution, led by UNICEF and the ILO among others, have been focused on delivering better education and skills, through equalizing access to digital learning (mass teacher reskilling, or identifying, supporting and amplifying new approaches).
Company-led initiatives are helping future-proof their workforces, even in an economically constrained environment. Reskilling Revolution companies are leading new approaches to support their workforces, and their supply chains and communities through access to education, skills and better jobs. In addition to founding members of the platform, such as Adecco Group, LinkedIn and ManpowerGroup, the initiative recently welcomed new partner commitments from Royal Bank of Canada, Unilever and Verizon.



About The Davos Agenda The Davos Agenda is a pioneering mobilization of global leaders aimed at rebuilding trust to shape the principles, policies and partnerships needed in 2021. Taking place from 25-29 January, it features a full week of global programming dedicated to helping leaders choose innovative and bold solutions to stem the pandemic and drive a robust recovery over the next year. Heads of state, chief executives, civil society leaders, and global media will actively participate in almost 100 sessions spanning five themes. Media can register here. 


Join Reskilling Revolution-related sessions during The Davos Agenda:



Delivering the Reskilling Revolution, 25 January 2021, 15.30-16.30 CET
Skilling the Global Workforce, 28 January 2021, 9.15-10.00 CET
Skilling the Global Workforce, 28 January 2021, 16.15-17.00 CET



Note to Editors Visit the Reskilling Revolution website http://www.reskillingrevolution2030.org


How to follow and watch sessions at The Davos Agenda


The Davos Agenda Registration for Media


Learn about the Forum’s impact Check out Forum videos | photos


Facebook | Twitter | Instagram | LinkedIn | TikTok | Weibo | Podcasts


Read the Forum Agenda (also in French | Spanish | Mandarin | Japanese) 


Subscribe to News releases and Podcasts


Explore the Forum’s Strategic Intelligence Platform and Transformation Maps




          Share
        








































All opinions expressed are those of the author. The World Economic Forum Blog is an independent and neutral platform dedicated to generating debate around the key topics that shape global, regional and industry agendas.










Subscribe to our Press Releases











Follow Us















About



Our Mission


The Davos Manifesto


Careers


Strategic Intelligence


Contact Us


Code of Conduct


World Economic Forum LLC


Sustainability


Leadership and Governance


World Economic Forum Privacy Policy 


Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution


New Champions


Our Partners


Our Impact


Communities


History


Centre for Cybersecurity


Klaus Schwab


Global Innovators


Pictures







Media



News


Accreditation


Subscribe to our news







Members & Partners



Member login to TopLink


Strategic Partners' area


Partner Institutes' area







Global sites



Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution


Open Forum


Global Shapers


Schwab Foundation for Social Entrepreneurship


Young Global Leaders


Strategic Intelligence


Global Risks


UpLink Platform



EN
ES FR 中文 日本語









            © 2021 World Economic Forum
          

Privacy Policy & Terms of Service































