


Collaboration and Environmental Protection Dominate Leadership Addresses on Day Two of Davos Agenda  > Press releases | World Economic Forum

































































Agenda


Platforms


Reports


Events


Videos




 English
              

 English
              




English


Español


Français


中文


日本語









Sign In

 







This site uses cookies to deliver website functionality and analytics. If you would like to know more about the types of cookies we serve and how to change your cookie settings, please read our Cookie Notice. By clicking the "I accept" button, you consent to the use of these cookies.

I accept














Agenda


Platforms


Reports


Events


Videos








      English
    


English


Español


Français


中文


日本語








                Sign-in
              





























Media
News Releases

Collaboration and Environmental Protection Dominate Leadership Addresses on Day Two of Davos Agenda 







          Published
        
26 Jan 2021



          2021
        

            Share
          










































Public Engagement, World Economic Forum, public.affairs@weforum.org 



“Global links and global commitments mean we have to have an interest in how the rest of the world is faring,” said Angela Merkel, Federal Chancellor of Germany
According to Emmanuel Macron, President of France, the “economy of tomorrow is going to have to think about innovation and humanity”
Ursula von der Leyen, President of the European Commission, said: “We must learn from this crisis. We have to change the way we live and do business to be able to keep what we value and hold dear”
Cyril Ramaphosa, President of South Africa, suggested that “the task is not to return the world to where it was when the pandemic struck, but to forge a new path and a new design”
View the special addresses and learn more about the Davos Agenda



Geneva, Switzerland, 26 January 2021 – On a day where 61 senior business leaders announced their commitment to the Stakeholder Capitalism Metrics – a set of environmental, social and governance (ESG) metrics and disclosures – world leaders called for greater collaboration and issued warnings of the perils awaiting if we fail to do so. 


Ursula von der Leyen, President of the European Commission, called for a “Paris-style agreement for biodiversity”, laying out in stark terms the economic and social risks of failing to protect a high-functioning biodiverse ecosystem. She warned that issues – ranging from climate change and the pandemic to the lack of social media governance – pose a challenge to democracy, showing the “limitations of the old ways of working”. 


According to von der Leyen, the global push to create a vaccine – something that was achieved in 10 months rather than over several years – reveals what happens with “pooled resources, shared expertise, manufacturers working together and government finance”. The European Commission president urged greater collaboration, arguing that we need to understand that “it is not weakness to reach and help each other, but strength.”


Angela Merkel, Federal Chancellor of Germany, reflected on how the “pandemic has left deep imprints on economies and our societies,” and will “determine how we live and do business in the next few years.” She focused on multilateralism and collaboration, arguing that the pandemic has shown “how much we are interlinked, how globally interdependent,” warning that “trying to isolate yourself fails.” Reflecting this, the German chancellor announced that “this is the hour of multilateralism,” which for her means greater transparency in global relations, as well as better supporting developing nations. Merkel declared that “development cooperation is in our national interest.”


Like a number of the speakers, Emmanuel Macron, President of France, used the word “vulnerable” to describe the human condition. He argued that the pandemic has shown that the “capitalist model can no longer work” and suggested that “we can’t build anything without reaping the benefits and learning the lessons of COVID-19.” Macron placed humans at the centre of this, saying: “You cannot think ‘economy’ without thinking about human beings,” adding that it will only be possible to address the pandemic with an economy that fights inequality.


Considering the economy of tomorrow, the French president said that in addition to considering innovation and humanity, it would have to build competitiveness while also fighting climate change and reducing CO2 emissions. He urged companies to play a role in fighting inequality in society and to take responsibility for mitigating the effects of climate change, and stressed how French businesses are already working hard to establish clear ESG metrics.


In an early morning special address, Cyril M. Ramaphosa, President of South Africa, set the tone for the day, describing how the economic challenges presented by COVID-19 had sped up the process of restructuring his nation’s economy. “The issue of collaboration, of working cohesively, has underpinned the plan,” he said. He argued that people rather than COVID-19 have created the challenges now faced, perhaps exemplified in the over-ordering of vaccines by wealthier nations leaving poorer countries and their populations facing shortages. He was, however, positive about future collaboration among African countries, describing the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) as “a revolutionary, sea change initiative … possibly the most important initiative the African continent has undertaken.”


Ramaphosa used his address to call on countries that have bought up large supplies of vaccines for COVID-19 to release the excess. He said that a vaccine acquisition task force had been created, but that its work had so far only been marginally successful. Speaking in a related session, John Nkengasong, Director of the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC), warned of a second aggressive wave of COVID-19 in the region and, underlining the South African president’s comments, said: “We as a continent must recognize that vaccines will not be here when we want them so we must focus on the public health measures that we know work while we’re waiting.”


About The Davos Agenda The Davos Agenda is a pioneering mobilization of global leaders aimed at rebuilding trust to shape the principles, policies and partnerships needed in 2021. A full week of global programming is under way, dedicated to helping leaders choose innovative and bold solutions to stem the pandemic and drive a robust recovery over the next year. Heads of state, chief executives, civil society leaders and the global media are participating in almost 100 sessions spanning five themes. 


Note to editors Watch more sessions from the Davos AgendaExplore the Forum’s Strategic Intelligence Platform and Transformation Maps Learn about the Forum’s impact Forum Agenda (also in French | Spanish | Mandarin | Japanese) Forum videos | photos Subscribe to News releases and PodcastFacebook | Twitter | Instagram | LinkedIn | TikTok | Weibo | Podcasts




          Share
        








































All opinions expressed are those of the author. The World Economic Forum Blog is an independent and neutral platform dedicated to generating debate around the key topics that shape global, regional and industry agendas.










Subscribe to our Press Releases











Follow Us















About



Our Mission


The Davos Manifesto


Careers


Strategic Intelligence


Contact Us


Code of Conduct


World Economic Forum LLC


Sustainability


Leadership and Governance


World Economic Forum Privacy Policy 


Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution


New Champions


Our Partners


Our Impact


Communities


History


Centre for Cybersecurity


Klaus Schwab


Global Innovators


Pictures







Media



News


Accreditation


Subscribe to our news







Members & Partners



Member login to TopLink


Strategic Partners' area


Partner Institutes' area







Global sites



Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution


Open Forum


Global Shapers


Schwab Foundation for Social Entrepreneurship


Young Global Leaders


Strategic Intelligence


Global Risks


UpLink Platform



EN
ES FR 中文 日本語









            © 2021 World Economic Forum
          

Privacy Policy & Terms of Service































