


Media > The EDISON Alliance | World Economic Forum



































































Agenda


Platforms


Reports


Events


Videos




 English
              

 English
              




English


Español


Français


中文


日本語









Sign In

 







This site uses cookies to deliver website functionality and analytics. If you would like to know more about the types of cookies we serve and how to change your cookie settings, please read our Cookie Notice. By clicking the "I accept" button, you consent to the use of these cookies.

I accept














Agenda


Platforms


Reports


Events


Videos








      English
    


English


Español


Français


中文


日本語








                Sign-in
              
































World Economic Forum


The EDISON Alliance
Connecting Governments, Connecting Industries, Connecting People



Home
About
Partners
Get Involved
Calendar
Media














Tackling Digital Deserts: Launch of First Cross-Sector Alliance to Close the Digital Divide



COVID-19 has exposed digital inequities and exacerbated the digital divide; it revealed the affordability challenges in wealthier nations and the deepening digital divide – nearly half the world is still not online
World Economic Forum launches the EDISON Alliance to accelerate digital inclusion, address inequality, and connect critical sectors of the economy
It is the first global mobilization of the public sector and industry leaders from all industries to ensure everyone can participate in the digital economy
Learn more here



Geneva, Switzerland, 28 January 2021 — Access to digital technologies has enabled many to work, learn and live during the COVID-19 pandemic. However, the pandemic has exposed and exacerbated existing gaps and inequalities: almost half of the global population, some 3.6 billion people, remain offline and broadband services are too expensive for 50% of the population in developed countries. These “connectivity deserts” hamper access to health, education, and economic inclusion.


To ensure global and equitable access to the digital economy, the World Economic Forum is launching the Essential Digital Infrastructure and Services Network, or EDISON Alliance. The Alliance will work with governments and industries to accelerate digital inclusion. Its goal is to ensure an unprecedented level of cross-sectoral collaboration between the technology industry and other critical sectors of the economy.


A multi-sector Board will steer the Alliance. Hans Vestberg, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Verizon, will serve as Chair of the Alliance and Board. He is joined by Paula Ingabire, Rwanda’s Minister for ICT and Innovation; Ajay Banga, the Executive Chairman of MasterCard; Shobana Kamineni Executive Vice Chairperson of Apollo Hospitals; and Robert F. Smith, Founder, Chairman and CEO of Vista Equity Partners. The World Economic Forum will serve as the secretariat and platform for the Alliance. A wider group of Champions Leaders will advise and support the Alliance. 


“This marks the first time so many leaders from so many industries are coming together from the public and private sector to close the digital divide,” said Derek O’Halloran, Head of the Digital Economy and New Value Creation Platform at the World Economic Forum. “Accelerating digital infrastructure and the broadband rollout is foundational to economic recovery, addressing inequality, and achieving the Sustainability Development Goals. It is critical to move together and move fast.”


The EDISON Alliance will prioritize digital inclusion as a platform of partners with a common purpose for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. In 2021, the Alliance will focus on increasing digital inclusion in healthcare, education and financial services. 


Quotes from the EDISON Alliance Board Members:




“Over the past ten months we have seen just how impactful connectivity and access to digital technologies is to working, learning and transacting. I've long believed that mobility, broadband, and cloud services are the 21st century’s infrastructure, but to use them to their greatest impact, we need to galvanize both the private and the public sectors. This is a critical moment for leaders across all sectors to join forces and recognize access and affordability to digital services as a top priority for recovery in every country.” 
—Hans Vestberg, Chairman and CEO, Verizon – Chairman of The EDISON Alliance









“There is no Internet of Everything without the inclusion of everyone. But by putting our collective capabilities to work connecting people and businesses in the right way—with secure access and informed usage—we can start to tackle other barriers, like access to capital, and provide other opportunities for growth. Digital Inclusion sets people up for so many other kinds of inclusion.” 
—Ajay Banga, Mastercard Executive Chair









“We have seen tremendous collaborations during the pandemic to enable greater access to digital services. Moving forward we need even greater mobilization of all levels of government and private sector organizations to develop impactful solutions that will ensure equitable and affordable access to broadband connectivity, in order to achieve the targets set for 2025.” 
—Paula Ingabire, Minister for ICT & Innovation, Rwanda









“The age of health IOT was propelled to warp speed during the Covid pandemic across the globe. Geography, distances and convenience converged to make teleconsults available not only to those in distant locations, but also to cities in lockdown. In the US, telehealth usage jumped from 11% in 2019 to 46%, whilst in India, there was a massive jump of 300%[2] in online consultations. Digital health is on trajectory to make health & well-being ubiquitous, affordable and life enhancing and as we transition to the post-Covid world, we will need to accelerate this effort through value-based digital services.” 
—Shobana Kamineni, Executive Vice-Chairperson, Apollo Hospitals









“Connectivity is oxygen for opportunity. The global pandemic laid bare the divide between those who are connected and the billions who are not. Just as we push for equitable access to clean air and water, we also need to scale up access to broadband, devices, and digital literacy, which are onramps to education, healthcare, financial services, and human empowerment. This will require investment and coordination across countries and sectors, and the EDISON Alliance is an important platform to advance this mission.” 
—Robert F. Smith, Founder, Chairman and CEO, Vista Equity Partners










Media Coverage



Digital identity can help advance inclusive financial services


Yahoo! Finance: 'It's a moral imperative' - Public-private partnership launched to expand worldwide internet access


Meet the Leader podcast: Verizon's Hans Vestberg on how to focus on what's most important


Closing the Digital Divide - Global Technology Governance Summit


2021 MWC Shanghai/GSMA Opening Keynote with Rima Qureshi | Verizon


Yahoo! Finance: Digital Inclusion at Davos Agenda 2021


COVID-19: watershed moment for digital healthcare?


Forbes: Top Bosses At Verizon, Google, Mastercard Form Group To Build Universal Broadband


FIERCE Wireless: Hans Vestberg chairs Edison Alliance to close the global digital divide


The New Times: Minister Ingabire named on board of global body for bridging digital divide


The Hindu: World Economic Forum launches cross-sector alliance to close digital divide


LightReading: Verizon, Google, others form Edison Alliance to tackle digital divide


Cities Today: Verizon-led alliance to promote investment in connectivity


RCR Wireless News: World Economic Forum launches EDISON Alliance focused on digital inclusion, digital divide





Click the link below to get in touch



Contact Us





Press Release



Tackling Digital Deserts: First Cross-Sector Alliance Launched to Close the Digital Divide (Jan 2021)












                
                Accelerating Digital Inclusion 
                                        View all  






Meet the Leader podcast: Verizon's Hans Vestberg on how to focus on what's most importantLinda Lacina 09 Apr 2021
2021 MWC Shanghai/GSMA Opening Keynote with Rima Qureshi | Verizon10 Mar 2021
A new analysis of Mastercard data finds uneven spending declines in communities across the city





Davos 2021 - Accelerating Digital Inclusion in a Post-COVID World (Option 1) - english28 Jan 2021
Davos 2021 - Accelerating Digital Inclusion in a Post-COVID World (Option 2) - english28 Jan 2021
COVID-19: watershed moment for digital healthcare?Shobana Kamineni 14 Jan 2021
Tackling Digital Deserts: Launch of First Cross-Sector Alliance to Close the Digital Divide 
Tackling digital deserts: The first cross-sector alliance to close the digital gap launches at The Davos Agenda
Klaus Schwab on Digital Cooperation11 Jan 2021
















Subscribe for updates
A weekly update of what’s on the Global Agenda










Follow Us















About



Our Mission


The Davos Manifesto


Careers


Strategic Intelligence


Contact Us


Code of Conduct


World Economic Forum LLC


Sustainability


Leadership and Governance


World Economic Forum Privacy Policy 


Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution


New Champions


Our Partners


Our Impact


Communities


History


Centre for Cybersecurity


Klaus Schwab


Global Innovators


Pictures







Media



News


Accreditation


Subscribe to our news







Members & Partners



Member login to TopLink


Strategic Partners' area


Partner Institutes' area







Global sites



Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution


Open Forum


Global Shapers


Schwab Foundation for Social Entrepreneurship


Young Global Leaders


Strategic Intelligence


Global Risks


UpLink Platform



EN
ES FR 中文 日本語









            © 2021 World Economic Forum
          

Privacy Policy & Terms of Service































