


Klaus Schwab Releases “Stakeholder Capitalism”; Making the Case for a Global Economy that Works for Progress, People and Planet > Press releases | World Economic Forum

































































Agenda


Platforms


Reports


Events


Videos




 English
              

 English
              




English


Español


Français


中文


日本語









Sign In

 







This site uses cookies to deliver website functionality and analytics. If you would like to know more about the types of cookies we serve and how to change your cookie settings, please read our Cookie Notice. By clicking the "I accept" button, you consent to the use of these cookies.

I accept














Agenda


Platforms


Reports


Events


Videos








      English
    


English


Español


Français


中文


日本語








                Sign-in
              





























Media
News Releases

Klaus Schwab Releases “Stakeholder Capitalism”; Making the Case for a Global Economy that Works for Progress, People and Planet







          Published
        
29 Jan 2021



          2021
        

            Share
          










































Peter Vanham, Head of Chairman’s Communications, peter.vanham@weforum.org



In his new book, released this week, Klaus Schwab looks at the achievement and shortcomings of the global economic system, and suggests way to improve it
He makes the case for “Stakeholder Capitalism”, arguing that systems such as shareholder capitalism and state capitalism led the world down an unsustainable path
Among those providing an “advance praise” are the leaders of Microsoft, Salesforce and Bank of America; ethologist and conservationist Jane Goodall, and Oxfam Director Gabriela Bucher
The book is published by Wiley, and available as of January 27. Read more about it here



Geneva, Switzerland, 29 January 2021—Klaus Schwab, Founder and Executive Chairman of the World Economic Forum, and author of the best-selling books “The Fourth Industrial Revolution” and “COVID-19: The Great Reset” released his new book, “Stakeholder Capitalism: A Global Economy that Works for Progress, People and Planet”, co-authored with Peter Vanham. 


In the book, Schwab looks at the achievements and shortcomings of the global economic system dominant in the past decades: shareholder capitalism in the West, and state capitalism in the East. Both systems enabled unprecedented advances in wealth, measured by GDP and profits, he writes. But they also led to historical economic inequality, and the degradation of the environment. 


“We can’t continue with an economic system driven by selfish values, such as short-term profit maximization, the avoidance of tax and regulation, or the externalizing of environmental harm,” Schwab writes. “Instead, we need a society, economy, and international community that is designed to care for all people and the entire planet.” 


Schwab proposes a third way: the model of stakeholder capitalism. It is one where companies seek long-term value creation instead of short-term profits; governments cooperate to create the greatest possible prosperity for their people, and civil society and international organizations complete the stakeholder dialogue, helping balance the interests of people and the planet. 


Schwab first wrote about the stakeholder model in his book “Modern Enterprise Management” in 1971. 50 years on, his views are becoming mainstream in the global business community. Advocacy groups such as the US Business Roundtable endorsed stakeholder capitalism in 2019, and more than 60 World Economic Forum members this week signed up for the “Stakeholder Capitalism Metrics”. 


Various global commentators provided an “Advance Praise” of the book. Cellist Yo-Yo Ma said it “offers a vision for politics and economics driven not only driven by value creation, but by values”. Jane Goodall, Founder of the Jane Goodall Institute, and UN Messenger of Peace, called it "fascinating," and Oxfam Director Gabriela Bucher a “timely analysis”. A discussion on the book was held on Monday at the Davos Agenda. 


Political and business leaders also offered their endorsement, including the CEOs of Microsoft, Salesforce, Tata Sons, Grupo Santander, Bank of America, and the Prime Ministers of Belgium and the Netherlands, Alexander De Croo and Mark Rutte. Excerpts of the book are available for publication here, and here. Review copies can be obtained via peter.vanham@weforum.org. 







Stakeholder Capitalism is published by John Wiley & Sons, and available globally as January 27, 2021. You can buy it from Wiley, or wherever books are sold: e.g. Barnes & Noble (US), Waterstones (UK), Chapters (Canada), Thalia (Germany), Fnac (France), Kinokuniya (Singapore), the independent bookstores of Bookshop.org, or Amazon in the Americas, Europe, and Asia. 


About The Davos AgendaThe Davos Agenda is a pioneering mobilization of global leaders aimed at rebuilding trust to shape the principles, policies and partnerships needed in 2021. A full week of global programming is under way, dedicated to helping leaders choose innovative and bold solutions to stem the pandemic and drive a robust recovery over the next year. Heads of state, chief executives, civil society leaders and the global media are participating in almost 100 sessions spanning five themes.


Notes to EditorsWatch more sessions from the Davos AgendaExplore the Forum’s Strategic Intelligence Platform and Transformation MapsLearn about the Forum’s impactForum Agenda (also in French | Spanish | Mandarin | Japanese)Forum videos | photosSubscribe to News releases and PodcastFacebook | Twitter | Instagram | LinkedIn | TikTok | Weibo | Podcasts




          Share
        








































All opinions expressed are those of the author. The World Economic Forum Blog is an independent and neutral platform dedicated to generating debate around the key topics that shape global, regional and industry agendas.










Subscribe to our Press Releases











Follow Us















About



Our Mission


The Davos Manifesto


Careers


Strategic Intelligence


Contact Us


Code of Conduct


World Economic Forum LLC


Sustainability


Leadership and Governance


World Economic Forum Privacy Policy 


Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution


New Champions


Our Partners


Our Impact


Communities


History


Centre for Cybersecurity


Klaus Schwab


Global Innovators


Pictures







Media



News


Accreditation


Subscribe to our news







Members & Partners



Member login to TopLink


Strategic Partners' area


Partner Institutes' area







Global sites



Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution


Open Forum


Global Shapers


Schwab Foundation for Social Entrepreneurship


Young Global Leaders


Strategic Intelligence


Global Risks


UpLink Platform



EN
ES FR 中文 日本語









            © 2021 World Economic Forum
          

Privacy Policy & Terms of Service































