


Calls for Private Investment to Fill Humanitarian Aid Needs > Press releases | World Economic Forum

































































Agenda


Platforms


Reports


Events


Videos




 English
              

 English
              




English


Español


Français


中文


日本語









Sign In

 







This site uses cookies to deliver website functionality and analytics. If you would like to know more about the types of cookies we serve and how to change your cookie settings, please read our Cookie Notice. By clicking the "I accept" button, you consent to the use of these cookies.

I accept














Agenda


Platforms


Reports


Events


Videos








      English
    


English


Español


Français


中文


日本語








                Sign-in
              





























Media
News Releases

Calls for Private Investment to Fill Humanitarian Aid Needs







          Published
        
28 Jan 2021



          2021
        

            Share
          










































Public Engagement, World Economic Forum, public.affairs@weforum.org 



The number of people in need of humanitarian aid jumped by 50% to 235 million, according to UN
Funding gap for humanitarian aid more than doubled to $24 billion in 2020
The private sector has crucial role to play in plugging this funding gap through innovative financial models such as humanitarian and resilience investing
Unlocking this finance requires collaboration among all stakeholders to improve quality of data and metrics on social and environmental impacts of interventions
Learn more here



Geneva, Switzerland, 28 January 2021 — The COVID-19 pandemic could plunge 100 million more people into extreme poverty, according to the World Bank, at a time when aid budgets are being cut. The private sector has a key role to through investing in sustainable recovery and resilience of vulnerable communities.


In a report published today, Unlocking Humanitarian and Resilience Investing through Better Data, the World Economic Forum and Gulf International Bank (GIB) Asset Management as part of the Humanitarian and Resilience Investing Initiative issued a call to the private sector to work with humanitarian and development agencies and standard-setters to generate the data investors need. This would steer meaningful resources towards strengthening recovery and resilience among communities hit hardest by conflict and crisis. 


Humanitarian and resilience investing is an emerging theme at the sharp end of the sustainable investment portfolio and shares similar goals to impact investment – generating positive social and environmental impacts while tolerating higher risks and below-market returns. The market for impact investment stood at around $715 billion by the end of 2019, up 43% year-on-year.


The Forum’s report identifies a lack of reliable data as a critical barrier impairing the identification, appraisal and due diligence of potentially high-impact, bankable HRI transactions. The report highlights some case studies showing the value of good data. In the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Philips, the Dutch multinational, found that data on traceability and verification were critical in ensuring a conflict-free supply chain for tin, while empowering unemployed miners. 


The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has raised around CHF26 million of capital through its humanitarian impact bond to provide physical rehabilitation for people disabled by conflict and disaster in Nigeria, Mali and DRC. Returns on the bond were linked to the performance of ICRC’s programme against pre-specified metrics. 


The report identifies shortcomings in available data. Information at an initiative level is critical, but hard to find. Existing metrics are not standardized, making comparisons across organizations and sectors difficult. Data on social impacts and resilience-building – needed to enable HRI – is notoriously hard to collect. And much of the current data focuses on short-term response rather than on crisis prevention and recovery. 


The Forum and GIB Asset Management call on all organizations with an interest in strengthening crisis resilience – including businesses, investors, standard-setters, donors, philanthropists and humanitarian organizations – to collaborate in creating more effective data solutions to unlock the full potential of investment finance as a force for good among some of the world’s most disaster-affected communities.


About The Davos Agenda The Davos Agenda is a pioneering mobilization of global leaders aimed at rebuilding trust to shape the principles, policies and partnerships needed in 2021. It features a full week of global programming dedicated to helping leaders choose innovative and bold solutions to stem the pandemic and drive a robust recovery over the next year. Heads of state, CEOs, civil society leaders, and global media will actively participate in almost 100 sessions across five themes. Media can register here.


Notes to EditorsWatch more sessions from the Davos AgendaExplore the Forum’s Strategic Intelligence Platform and Transformation MapsLearn about the Forum’s impactForum Agenda (also in French | Spanish | Mandarin | Japanese)Forum videos | photosSubscribe to News releases and PodcastFacebook | Twitter | Instagram | LinkedIn | TikTok | Weibo | Podcasts




          Share
        








































All opinions expressed are those of the author. The World Economic Forum Blog is an independent and neutral platform dedicated to generating debate around the key topics that shape global, regional and industry agendas.










Subscribe to our Press Releases











Follow Us















About



Our Mission


The Davos Manifesto


Careers


Strategic Intelligence


Contact Us


Code of Conduct


World Economic Forum LLC


Sustainability


Leadership and Governance


World Economic Forum Privacy Policy 


Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution


New Champions


Our Partners


Our Impact


Communities


History


Centre for Cybersecurity


Klaus Schwab


Global Innovators


Pictures







Media



News


Accreditation


Subscribe to our news







Members & Partners



Member login to TopLink


Strategic Partners' area


Partner Institutes' area







Global sites



Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution


Open Forum


Global Shapers


Schwab Foundation for Social Entrepreneurship


Young Global Leaders


Strategic Intelligence


Global Risks


UpLink Platform



EN
ES FR 中文 日本語









            © 2021 World Economic Forum
          

Privacy Policy & Terms of Service































