




















Online Event: Toward a New Global Trade Framework | Center for Strategic and International Studies

















































Skip to main content






Sections
Search






Center for Strategic & International Studies



  User menu 
Subscribe
Sign In

 



  Topics 
Climate Change
Cybersecurity and TechnologyCybersecurity
Data Governance
Intelligence, Surveillance, and Privacy
Military Technology
Space
Technology and Innovation

Defense and SecurityCounterterrorism and Homeland Security
Defense Budget
Defense Industry, Acquisition, and Innovation
Defense Strategy and Capabilities
Geopolitics and International Security
Long-Term Futures
Missile Defense
Space
Weapons of Mass Destruction Proliferation

EconomicsAsian Economics
Global Economic Governance
Trade and International Business

Energy and SustainabilityEnergy, Climate Change, and Environmental Impacts
Energy and Geopolitics
Energy Innovation
Energy Markets, Trends, and Outlooks

Global HealthFamily Planning, Maternal and Child Health, and Immunizations
Multilateral Institutions
Health and Security
Infectious Disease

Human RightsCivil Society
Transitional Justice
Human Security

International DevelopmentFood and Agriculture
Governance and Rule of Law
Humanitarian Assistance
Human Mobility
Private Sector Development
U.S. Development Policy


 Regions 
AfricaNorth Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa

AmericasCaribbean
North America
South America

Arctic
AsiaAfghanistan
Australia, New Zealand & Pacific
China
India
Japan
Korea
Pakistan
Southeast Asia

EuropeEuropean Union
NATO
Post-Soviet Europe
Turkey

Middle EastThe Gulf
Egypt and the Levant
North Africa

Russia and EurasiaThe South Caucasus
Central Asia
Post-Soviet Europe
Russia


 Sections menu 
Programs
Experts
Events
AnalysisBlogs
Books
Commentary
Congressional Testimony
Critical Questions
Interactive Reports
Journals
Newsletter
Reports
Transcript

Podcasts
iDeas Lab
Transcripts
Web Projects

 Main menu 
About Us
Support CSISSecuring Our Future


 


 

    Photo: FABRICE COFFRINI/AFP/Getty Images  


 
CSIS PRESENTS
Embedded video
 



 Past Event 
 
Share
 LinkedIn
Facebook
Twitter
Email
Printfriendly.com
 
  

Online Event: Toward a New Global Trade Framework
 Tuesday, February 2, 2021 2:00 pm - 3:00 pm The United States has played a leading role in setting global trade rules for nearly 75 years. Yet two decades into the twenty-first century, it is clear that momentum for the global rules-based trading system is faltering, in part due to wavering U.S. trade leadership. As a response, the CSIS Trade Commission on Affirming American Leadership released a report on revitalizing U.S. trade leadership for the twenty-first century. The commission recommends action in three areas: the establishment of a new trade Compact to address twenty-first-century trade issues, a pragmatic WTO reform agenda, and a review of the domestic U.S. trade toolbox. Action in these three areas provides the foundation for an ambitious trade agenda that will position the United States to remain a leader in shaping the global rules-based trading system.
 
We are honored to have Senator William E. Brock, Ambassador Charlene Barshefsky, and Mr. William Alan Reinsch join us to discuss the newly released report. This discussion will be moderated by Scott Miller, Senior Adviser with the Abshire-Inamori Leadership Academy at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. We hope you will be able to join us for what is sure to be an engaging and informative discussion.
 
This event was made possible through the generous support of the CSIS Strategic Initiatives Fund, as well as individual contributions from Frederick W. Smith, Gary J. Baumgartner, and W. James McNerney.

Featuring
Senator William E. Brock Former USTR (1981 – 1985); Former Secretary of Labor (1985 – 1987); U.S. Senator from Tennessee (1971 – 1977); CSIS Counselor and TrusteeAmbassador Charlene BarshefskySenior International Partner at WilmerHale; Former U.S. Trade Representative (1997-2001)

CSIS Experts

 




Scott Miller
Senior Adviser, Abshire-Inamori Leadership Academy


 




William Alan Reinsch
Senior Adviser and Scholl Chair in International Business



 

 
Contact 
   Contact Jasmine Lim
Tel: 410.350.1148 

Media Queries
 Contact H. Andrew Schwartz Chief Communications Officer Tel: 202.775.3242
 Contact Caleb Diamond Media Relations Manager and Editorial Associate Tel: 202.775.3173


 
Related
Global Economic Governance, Trade and International Business 

  
 
Featured
 
 
Report



Toward a New Global Trade Framework
By William Alan Reinsch, Matthew P. Goodman, Scott Miller
February 2, 2021





Related Content
 
 
On Demand Event



Online Event: Preparing the Workforce for 2030: A Pillar of Trade Leadership 
October 2, 2020


 
On Demand Event



Online Event: A Conversation with Former USTRs
December 17, 2020


 
On Demand Event



Online Event: A new transatlantic agenda: A conversation with EU Director General of DG Trade, Sabine Weyand
January 15, 2021


 
On Demand Event



Toward a Climate-Driven Trade Agenda
March 5, 2021


 
Report



Toward a New Global Trade Framework
By William Alan Reinsch, Matthew P. Goodman, Scott Miller
February 2, 2021


 
Upcoming Event



Toward a More Equitable Trade System: Empowering Women
May 28, 2021


 
On Demand Event



Covid-19 Supply Chains and the Trusted Trade Partner Network
February 25, 2021


 
Report



Affirming American Leadership: A Call to Action
By Frederick W. Smith, William E. Brock
September 16, 2020




 



  Footer menu 
Topics
Regions
Programs
Experts
Events
Analysis
Web Projects
Podcasts
iDeas Lab
Transcripts
About Us
Support Us

 
  Contact CSIS Email CSIS
Tel: 202.887.0200
Fax: 202.775.3199
 Visit CSIS Headquarters 1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
 Media Queries Contact H. Andrew Schwartz Chief Communications Officer Tel: 202.775.3242
 Contact Caleb Diamond Media Relations Manager and Editorial Associate Tel: 202.775.3173

 
  Daily Updates Sign up to receive The Evening, a daily brief on the news, events, and people shaping the world of international affairs.Subscribe to CSIS Newsletters  Follow CSIS 
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
YouTube
Instagram


 

All content © 2021. All rights reserved.
Legal menu 
Credits
Privacy Policy
Reprint Permissions




 

