


Young change-makers will power circular economy innovation in hubs around the world > Press releases | World Economic Forum

































































Agenda


Platforms


Reports


Events


Videos




 English
              

 English
              




English


Español


Français


中文


日本語









Sign In

 







This site uses cookies to deliver website functionality and analytics. If you would like to know more about the types of cookies we serve and how to change your cookie settings, please read our Cookie Notice. By clicking the "I accept" button, you consent to the use of these cookies.

I accept














Agenda


Platforms


Reports


Events


Videos








      English
    


English


Español


Français


中文


日本語








                Sign-in
              





























Media
News Releases

Young change-makers will power circular economy innovation in hubs around the world







          Published
        
08 Feb 2021



          2021
        

            Share
          










































Linda Lacina, Public Engagement, World Economic Forum, linda.lacina@weforum.org



Innovation is critical to triggering a much-needed shift in how products are made and consumed.




Hub-led approaches – powered by technologists, political leaders, researchers and more – can help jumpstart circular innovation.




The World Economic Forum will launch circular innovation hubs in Mexico City, Brussels, Turin and Bangkok – with more to come.




This pilot program is co-launched by Scale360° and the Global Shapers Community, two initiatives hosted by the World Economic Forum.




Leveraging young change-makers from the Global Shapers Community ensures a grass-roots approach to triggering local solutions to circular change.



Geneva, Switzerland, 8 February 2021 – To achieve the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030, a new circular approach is needed to transform the goods and services we have and the pipeline of innovations still to come. To support this effort, circular economy initiative Scale360° will launch a youth-led, grassroots pilot program with the Global Shapers, a network of change-makers in cities around the world. Innovators in four Global Shaper hubs (in Mexico City, Brussels, Turin and Bangkok) will design, organize, and deliver interventions that support circular economy solutions tailored to local needs.World Economic Forum initiative Scale360° leverages innovation ‘hubs’ to bring together leaders in science, policy and business to trigger circular change. Leaders and collaborators in Global Shaper hub cities will utilize Scale360°’s unique, tested methodology – the Scale360° Circular Innovation Playbook – to fast-track Fourth Industrial Revolution impact.Hub cities were selected from a competitive pool of 40+ applications and the pilot initiative will facilitate connections from across its networks of experts and leaders in civil society, government and industry – including the Platform for Accelerating Circular Economy (PACE), the Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution, and others. Such efforts are key to triggering systems change. As new research from the World Economic Forum and ScaleUpNation has explained, finding ‘trailblazing’ companies looking for scalable circular solutions can have a cascading effect throughout their industries – one not possible through traditional commercial solutions.Said Scale360° global lead Helen Burdett: “Each of the selected Global Shaper pilot leaders brings a different perspective and recognizes circular innovation as not only an environmental imperative, but also as a business opportunity. We are eager to see how each city delivers its Scale360° programme during this sprint.”The pilot launch also marks a potential turning point for circular change. “We’re at an inflection point in today’s very linear ‘take-make-dispose’ economy,” said Jamie Butterworth, Circularity Capital Partner and Scale360° board member. “The Forum’s Scale360° hubs will play an important role in further fostering collaborative innovation and accelerating the transition towards a more restorative, circular economy.”Added Sara Lee, Mexico City Hub Scale360° Project Co-lead: “This initiative allows each of us to have local impact while imagining the global possibilities of our actions. Considering the local and the global will help us make progress for a circular future.” Note to EditorsLearn more about Scale360°Explore the Forum’s Strategic Intelligence Platform and Transformation MapsLearn about the Forum’s impactForum Agenda (also in French | Spanish | Mandarin | Japanese)Forum videos | photosSubscribe to News releases and PodcastFacebook | Twitter | Instagram | LinkedIn | TikTok | Weibo | Podcasts




          Share
        








































All opinions expressed are those of the author. The World Economic Forum Blog is an independent and neutral platform dedicated to generating debate around the key topics that shape global, regional and industry agendas.










Subscribe to our Press Releases











Follow Us















About



Our Mission


The Davos Manifesto


Careers


Strategic Intelligence


Contact Us


Code of Conduct


World Economic Forum LLC


Sustainability


Leadership and Governance


World Economic Forum Privacy Policy 


Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution


New Champions


Our Partners


Our Impact


Communities


History


Centre for Cybersecurity


Klaus Schwab


Global Innovators


Pictures







Media



News


Accreditation


Subscribe to our news







Members & Partners



Member login to TopLink


Strategic Partners' area


Partner Institutes' area







Global sites



Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution


Open Forum


Global Shapers


Schwab Foundation for Social Entrepreneurship


Young Global Leaders


Strategic Intelligence


Global Risks


UpLink Platform



EN
ES FR 中文 日本語









            © 2021 World Economic Forum
          

Privacy Policy & Terms of Service































