This site uses cookies to optimize functionality and give you the best possible experience. If you continue to navigate this website beyond this page, cookies will be placed on your browser. To learn more about cookies, click here. With 189 member countries, staff from more than 170 countries, and offices in over 130 locations, the World Bank Group is a unique global partnership: five institutions working for sustainable solutions that reduce poverty and build shared prosperity in developing countries.   The World Bank Group works in every major area of development.  We provide a wide array of financial products and technical assistance, and we help countries share and apply innovative knowledge and solutions to the challenges they face. We face big challenges to help the world’s poorest people and ensure that everyone sees benefits from economic growth. Data and research help us understand these challenges and set priorities, share knowledge of what works, and measure progress. COVID-19 vaccines, alongside widespread testing, improved treatment and strong health systems are critical to save lives and strengthen the global economic recovery. To provide relief for vulnerable populations, low- and middle-income countries need fair, broad, and fast access to effective and safe vaccines. That’s why the World Bank (WB) is building on its initial COVID-19 response with $12 billion to help poor countries purchase and distribute vaccines, tests, and treatments. The first WB-financed operation to support vaccine rollout was approved in January 2021.  As of  May 13, the World Bank has approved vaccine projects in 21 countries amounting to more than $2 billion. We expect to reach 50 countries amounting to $4 billion by mid-year. The countries with approved vaccine projects so far are Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Cabo Verde, Cote d’Ivoire, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Honduras, Lebanon, Moldova, Mongolia, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda, Sri Lanka, The Gambia, Tajikistan, Tunisia and Ukraine. All approved projects are summarized here. Financing: How it works: Vaccine purchase: The WB provides options for vaccine purchase and financing mechanisms including: Vaccine distribution: To help countries get ready to deploy vaccines and strengthen their health systems, which are key for effective vaccine distribution, WB financing will be used to establish policies for safe and effective deployment, expand storage and building cold chains, develop data and tracking systems, train health workers and build trust in immunizations through citizen and community engagement. IFC’s support on vaccines Another important part of the World Bank Group’s response comes from IFC, our private sector development arm. The $4 billion Global Health Platform supports private companies in delivering health products and services – including vaccines – to developing countries. This includes: General information on the World Bank Group’s COVID-19 response: The World Bank Group, one of the largest sources of funding and knowledge for developing countries, is taking broad, fast action to help developing countries respond to the health, social and economic impacts of COVID-19. The Bank Group’s emergency support operation is helping over 110 developing countries strengthen health systems, support the poorest households, and create supportive conditions to maintain livelihoods and jobs for those hit hardest. Last Updated: May 14, 2021