




























      G7 Leaders' Statement: 19 February 2021 - GOV.UK
  






























Cookies on GOV.UK

We use some essential cookies to make this website work.
We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.
We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.




Accept additional cookies
Reject additional cookies
View cookies




You can change your cookie settings at any time.

Hide this message





Skip to main content















                  GOV.UK
                



Show or hide search




    Search on GOV.UK
  




        Search GOV.UK
      








Menu




        Departments
      



        Worldwide
      



        How government works
      



        Get involved
      



        Consultations
      



        Statistics
      



        News and communications
      














 

                      Coronavirus (COVID-19)
          

 

Rules, guidance and support












Home


International









      Press release
    

    G7 Leaders' Statement: 19 February 2021
  



Statement by the leaders of the G7.







From:

Prime Minister's Office, 10 Downing Street and The Rt Hon Boris Johnson MP

Published
19 February 2021

















We, the leaders of the Group of Seven, met today and resolved to work together to beat COVID-19 and build back better. Drawing on our strengths and values as democratic, open economies and societies, we will work together and with others to make 2021 a turning point for multilateralism and to shape a recovery that promotes the health and prosperity of our people and planet.
We will intensify cooperation on the health response to COVID-19.  The dedication of essential workers everywhere represents the best of humanity, while the rapid discovery of vaccines shows the power of human ingenuity. Working with, and together to strengthen, the World Health Organisation (WHO), and supporting its leading and coordinating role, we will: accelerate global vaccine development and deployment; work with industry to increase manufacturing capacity, including through voluntary licensing; improve information sharing, such as on sequencing new variants; and, promote transparent and responsible practices, and vaccine confidence. We reaffirm our support for all pillars of the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator (ACT-A), its COVAX facility, and affordable and equitable access to vaccines, therapeutics and diagnostics, reflecting the role of extensive immunisation as a global public good. Today, with increased financial commitments of over $4 billion USD to ACT-A and COVAX, collective G7 support totals $7.5 billion. We invite all partners, including the G20 and International Financial Institutions, to join us in increasing support to ACT-A, including to increase developing countries’ access to WHO-approved vaccines through the COVAX facility.
COVID-19 shows that the world needs stronger defences against future risks to global health security. We will work with the WHO, G20 and others, especially through the Global Health Summit in Rome, to bolster global health and health security architecture for pandemic preparedness, including through health financing and rapid response mechanisms, by strengthening the “One Health” approach and Universal Health Coverage, and exploring the potential value of a global health treaty.
We have provided unprecedented support for our economies over the past year totalling over $6 trillion across the G7. We will continue to support our economies to protect jobs and support a strong, sustainable, balanced and inclusive recovery. We reaffirm our support to the most vulnerable countries, our commitment to the Sustainable Development Goals, and our partnership with Africa, including to support a resilient recovery. We will work through the G20 and with the International Financial Institutions to strengthen support for countries’ responses by exploring all available tools, including through full and transparent implementation of the Debt Service Suspension Initiative and the Common Framework.
Recovery from COVID-19 must build back better for all. Looking to UNFCCC COP26 and CBD COP15, we will put our global ambitions on climate change and the reversal of biodiversity loss at the centre of our plans. We will make progress on mitigation, adaptation and finance in accordance with the Paris Agreement and deliver a green transformation and clean energy transitions that cut emissions and create good jobs on a path to net zero no later than 2050. We are committed to levelling up our economies so that no geographic region or person, irrespective of gender or ethnicity, is left behind. We will: champion open economies and societies; promote global economic resilience; harness the digital economy with data free flow with trust; cooperate on a modernised, freer and fairer rules-based multilateral trading system that reflects our values and delivers balanced growth with a reformed World Trade Organisation at its centre; and, strive to reach a consensus-based solution on international taxation by mid-2021 within the framework of the OECD. With the aim of supporting a fair and mutually beneficial global economic system for all people, we will engage with others, especially G20 countries including large economies such as China. As Leaders, we will consult with each other on collective approaches to address non-market oriented policies and practices, and we will cooperate with others to address important global issues that impact all countries.
We resolve to agree concrete action on these priorities at the G7 Summit in the United Kingdom in June, and we support the commitment of Japan to hold the Olympic and Paralympic Games Tokyo 2020 in a safe and secure manner this summer as a symbol of global unity in overcoming COVID-19.





Share this page








 
              Share on
          
          Facebook









 
              Share on
          
          Twitter






    Published 19 February 2021





Brexit

Check what you need to do










Explore the topic

International



Topical events

G7 UK 2021










Is this page useful?


      Maybe
    



          Yes this page is useful




          No this page is not useful





    Thank you for your feedback
  


      Report a problem with this page
    




    Close
  




Help us improve GOV.UK
Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.

What were you doing?



What went wrong?


Send





    Close
  





Help us improve GOV.UK
To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. We’ll send you a link to a feedback form. It will take only 2 minutes to fill in. Don’t worry we won’t send you spam or share your email address with anyone.

Email address


Send me the survey










Coronavirus (COVID-19)



               Coronavirus (COVID-19): guidance and support
            




Brexit



               Check what you need to do
            






Services and information





                  Benefits
                



                  Births, deaths, marriages and care
                



                  Business and self-employed
                



                  Childcare and parenting
                



                  Citizenship and living in the UK
                



                  Crime, justice and the law
                



                  Disabled people
                



                  Driving and transport
                







                  Education and learning
                



                  Employing people
                



                  Environment and countryside
                



                  Housing and local services
                



                  Money and tax
                



                  Passports, travel and living abroad
                



                  Visas and immigration
                



                  Working, jobs and pensions
                






Departments and policy



              How government works
            



              Departments
            



              Worldwide
            



              Services
            



              Guidance and regulation
            



              News and communications
            



              Research and statistics
            



              Policy papers and consultations
            



              Transparency and freedom of information releases
            







Support links

Help
Privacy
Cookies
Contact
Accessibility statement
Terms and conditions
Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg

    Built by the
    
      Government Digital Service
    





                    Open Government Licence
                  

All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated




                 © Crown copyright
              











