





GFMA LEI Webinar - The Evolution of the LEI: Innovation to Support Financial Markets | GFMA | Global Financial Markets Association




















































 




 









CONTACT US | SEARCH














Who We Are
Global Market Policies
Correspondence
News
Events
Foreign Exchange
Commodities
 






 











Who We Are
Global Market Policies
Correspondence
News
Events
Foreign Exchange
Commodities








GFMA LEI Webinar – The Evolution of the LEI: Innovation to Support Financial Markets















	Upcoming Events




AFME/OMFIF European Financial Integration Virtual Conference Forged in Crisis

                    15 June 2021, Virtual                




AFME 3rd Annual European Capital Markets Technology and Innovation Virtual Conference

                    22-24 September 2021, Virtual                




AFME 16th Annual European Leveraged Finance Conference

                    28 September 2021, London                




AFME 5th Annual European Compliance and Legal Virtual Conference

                    6-8 October 2021, Virtual                



See All Events












 

GFMA LEI Webinar
The Evolution of LEI: Innovation to Support Financial Markets
23 February 2021, 8.00AM – 9.00AM ET








GFMA LEI Webinar - 23 February 2021


 














About this Event
Watch the replay above to learn about key Global LEI Foundation (GLEIF) updates and a new model for LEI issuance.
This complimentary webinar features a panel discussion on how banks and financial institutions can leverage their KYC, AML and other regulated onboarding processes to become a Validation Agent and obtain LEIs on behalf of their clients. The webinar also explores the benefits of this model.

Webinar Slides:
Event presentation slides are available here for reference.

Webinar Topics:
Hear from our panel of experts as they discuss:

Why J.P. Morgan became the first Validation Agent in the Global LEI System
How the VA role integrates within a financial institution’s business model and client lifecycle management processes
Tangible benefits of the VA role for the financial institution and its customers
First-hand testimonial from an LOU within the VA framework, and how to expand business benefits through this model
GLEIF’s vision for voluntary LEI adoption across new industry sectors and the role of the vLEI

Featured Speakers

George Brandman, Managing Director, Reference Data Strategy, J.P. Morgan
Matt Stauffer, Managing Director, Head of Institutional Trade Processing, DTCC
Peter Warms, Business Development Manager, GLEIF
Stephan Wolf, Chief Executive Officer, GLEIF
Robin Doyle, Managing Director, Regulatory Affairs, J.P. Morgan (moderator)

Who Should Attend?
Legal, technology and operations professionals in financial services responsible for their firm’s risk and reference data management.






























Members of the GFMA alliance GFMA serves as a forum that brings together its existing regional trade association members to address issues with global implications.



Contact Us Contact us for information on membership, events and media inquiries. Contact Us or Email


Follow Us


Terms and Conditions
Privacy Policy







Copyright All Rights Reserved 2018. Website by Gosh Creative
Privacy Policy
Contact Us
Sitemap
 









 








									Some guy
								

									Some position
								

									Some company
								

									Some content
								

Close





Global Financial Market Association’s Annual Conference on Sustainable FinanceAFME/OMFIF European Financial Integration Virtual Conference Forged in Crisis















