


























A Windfall Is Coming For Banks















































Global Locations
Contact
Media Center
Alumni















Our Culture




Our People




Our Values




Our History


The Greater Good


Strategic Partners






Our Impact




Recognition and Accolades






Alumni




Inclusion & Diversity




MissionINCLUDE


2018 UK Gender Pay Gap Report


Women At Oliver Wyman (WOW)


Employees Of Oliver Wyman Enabling Racial & Ethnic Diversity (EMPOWERED)


LGBT+ And Allies At Oliver Wyman


Veterans Of Oliver Wyman (VOW)


Family Life At Oliver Wyman (FLOW)


Introversion At Oliver Wyman


2020 UK Gender Pay Gap Report






Oliver Wyman For Society




Sustainability








Our Expertise




Industries




Automotive


Business Services


Communications, Media, And Technology


Education


Energy


Financial Services


Health And Life Sciences


Industrial Products


Public Sector And Policy


Retail And Consumer Goods


Transportation






Capabilities




Actuarial


Climate And Sustainability


Corporate Finance And Restructuring


Digital


Lippincott: Brand and Innovation


Operations


Organizational Effectiveness


Payments


Pricing, Sales, And Marketing


Risk Management


Strategy


Oliver Wyman Engineers






Insights




Events




Hubs








Careers




Students and Recent Graduates




Roles At Oliver Wyman




Apply Now





























A Windfall Is Coming For Banks
Here's how they should use it

By Dan Rosenbaum and Dennis Chira

















 // . // 





//




A Windfall Is Coming For Banks




























































































By Dan Rosenbaum and Dennis Chira
This article originally appeared in Barrons.com on March 29, 2021.

The combination of the $1.9 trillion Covid-19 relief bill signed into law by President Joe Biden earlier this month, along with the rapid rollout of Covid-19 vaccines and the Federal Reserve’s near-term focus on employment over inflation, are going to create a period of unusually high profits for most U.S. banks.
This window will be temporary, perhaps lasting two or three years before profits return to more normal levels.
The quick burst of earnings will give banks an opportunity to finally do what most have been too financially challenged to accomplish: transform their business models to remain relevant in the digital age. They need to buckle down and do this now, with a sense of urgency, even if it means giving a little less back to shareholders in the short-term.
Read the full article in Barrons.com.




























Financial Services
Retail & Business Banking





Authors









Dan Rosenbaum

      Partner
    











Dennis Chira

      Principal, Retail and Business Banking
    








Related Articles


Digital Banking
Digital banks are now leveraging a superior client experience and structural cost advantage to rapidly gain customers and deposits.


Payments Transformation Continues
The Merchant Payments Digest is a regular update from Oliver Wyman to keep merchants apprised of developments in the rapidly shifting payments space.


Bankers Can Be Pandemic Heroes
Here Are Three Ways They Can Help Ease the Burden on US Households.


















We are one of the FORTUNE 100 best companies in the world to work for





Students And Recent Graduates Application
















Marsh McLennan is the leader in risk, strategy and people, helping clients navigate a dynamic environment through four global businesses.































Share



















































Terms of Use


Privacy Notice


Cookie Notice







© 2021 Oliver Wyman INC. All Rights Reserved.












Download Oliver Wyman Ideas App Our latest insights on your mobile device


 
 




 © 2021 Oliver Wyman 


























