












Events - Munk School of Global Affairs and Public Policy











































Receive the Munk School Newsletter


Global Site Search...


Search

Search in...

 News
 Research
 Blindspots
 Program
 Opportunities
 Features
 People

 Search events instead




Home

Newsletter Get updates on the latest events, research and news happening at the Munk School of Global Affairs & Public Policy.
Video Visit our official Youtube channel.


About Us

Annual Report: 2018-19 Read our annual report to learn about our impact over the past year.
Our Founding Donors Find out more about our founding donors – two of the world’s leading philanthropists.


People
For Future Students
Research
Centres & Programs
Events
Opportunities
Media Centre
Contact Us
 




Upcoming Events At The
Munk School of Global Affairs And Public Policy
March 13, 2020:
*As the U of T continues to monitor the development of the COVID-19 pandemic, some events listed below may be cancelled or postponed. Please contact the event organizer for more information.*
All events listed are open to the public unless otherwise stated. Some events may require a fee and/or online registration. Read specific event details for more information.
The Munk School of Global Affairs and Public Policy is an accessible facility and accessible entrances can be found at both of our locations. If visiting our 1 Devonshire Place location, accessible entrances can be found at both the North House and South House doors. If visiting our 315 Bloor Street West location, an accessible entrance can be found at the Devonshire Place door.
 
 Sign up to join our events mailing list

Search Events
Keyword:
				
Start Date:
				
End Date:
				

 Search Events






Navigating Canada-China-US Trilateral Relations

 Upcoming Events
 Login





						Friday, March 19th, 2021					
DateTimeLocationFriday, March 19, 20212:00PM - 3:15PMOnline Event, Online Event 

+ Register for this Event Print this Event Bookmark this Event 
DescriptionAs U.S.-China relations have deteriorated significantly over the past several years, Canada-China relations have spiraled downward in tandem. Both Canada and the United States face the need to preserve the benefits of cross-Pacific relations—including economic and trade ties and educational and cultural exchanges—while also addressing the China challenge. 
With a new administration taking the reins in Washington, can the United States and Canada find more effective joint efforts––by acting together rather than acting alone––to open up greater diplomatic space and compete with China? At a time when the world shares the goal of combatting COVID-19, accelerating economic recovery, and responding to climate change, are these and other areas ripe for trilateral collaboration? 
On Friday, March 19, the Munk School of Global Affairs & Public Policy at the University of Toronto and the John L. Thornton China Center at the Brookings Institution will provide a forum for scholars from the United States and Canada to explore what the future holds for trilateral relations.
 


ContactDaria Dumbabze SpeakersRyan Hass Panelist Senior Fellow, John L. Thornton China Center, Brookings; Former Director for China, Taiwan and Mongolia in the Obama White HouseCheng Li Panelist Director and Senior Fellow, John L. Thornton China Center, Brookings; Distinguished Fellow, Munk School, University of TorontoPeter Loewen Panelist Professor of Political Science and Associate Director of Global Engagement, Munk School, University of TorontoJanice Stein Panelist Professor of Political Science and Founding Director, Munk School, University of TorontoDiana Fu Moderator Associate Professor of Political Science and Director of the East Asia Seminar Series at the Asian Institute, Munk School, University of Toronto; Nonresident Fellow; John L. Thornton China Center, Brookings SponsorsEast Asia Seminar Series, Asian Institute, Munk SchoolMunk School of Global Affairs & Public PolicyJohn L. Thornton China Center at the Brookings Institution 



If you are attending a Munk School event and require accommodation(s), please email the event contact listed above to make appropriate arrangements.
 Disclaimer: Please note that events posted on this website are considered to be public events – unless otherwise stated – and you are choosing to enter a space where your image and/or voice may be captured as part of event proceedings that may be made public as part of a broadcast, webcast, or publication (online and in print). We make every effort to ensure your personal information is kept and used in compliance with the Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act (FIPPA). If you have any questions please get in touch with our office at munkschool@utoronto.ca  or 416-946-8900. 





 











Munk School of Global Affairs and Public Policy @ University of Toronto
315 Bloor Street West (At the Observatory) Toronto, Ontario, M5S 0A7 Canada
1 Devonshire Place (At Trinity College) Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3K7 Canada
14 Queen's Park Cres. West (At the Canadiana Gallery) 
							Toronto, ON M5S 3K9




About Us
People
Research
For Future Students


From the Director
Centres & Programs
Events
Our Founding Donors


International Partnerships
Video Archive
Jobs, Grants & Awards
Contact Us

 



General Inquiries: munkschool@utoronto.ca or (416) 946-8900


You can follow us @
Twitter
Facebook
Youtube
 

Munk School of Global Affairs and Public Policy © Copyright 2021, All rights reserved.


Back to Top


University of Toronto Home
Login


Newsletter Signup Sign up for the Munk School Newsletter


		First Name:
		


		Last Name:
		


		Email:
		

Submit
×
Strict NO SPAM policy. We value your privacy, and will never share your contact info.









