





















Africa's Global Reset: Foreign Relations in a Post-Pandemic Era | Center for Strategic and International Studies















































Skip to main content






Sections
Search






Center for Strategic & International Studies



  User menu 
Subscribe
Sign In

 



  Topics 
Climate Change
Cybersecurity and TechnologyCybersecurity
Data Governance
Intelligence, Surveillance, and Privacy
Military Technology
Space
Technology and Innovation

Defense and SecurityCounterterrorism and Homeland Security
Defense Budget
Defense Industry, Acquisition, and Innovation
Defense Strategy and Capabilities
Geopolitics and International Security
Long-Term Futures
Missile Defense
Space
Weapons of Mass Destruction Proliferation

EconomicsAsian Economics
Global Economic Governance
Trade and International Business

Energy and SustainabilityEnergy, Climate Change, and Environmental Impacts
Energy and Geopolitics
Energy Innovation
Energy Markets, Trends, and Outlooks

Global HealthFamily Planning, Maternal and Child Health, and Immunizations
Multilateral Institutions
Health and Security
Infectious Disease

Human RightsCivil Society
Transitional Justice
Human Security

International DevelopmentFood and Agriculture
Governance and Rule of Law
Humanitarian Assistance
Human Mobility
Private Sector Development
U.S. Development Policy


 Regions 
AfricaNorth Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa

AmericasCaribbean
North America
South America

Arctic
AsiaAfghanistan
Australia, New Zealand & Pacific
China
India
Japan
Korea
Pakistan
Southeast Asia

EuropeEuropean Union
NATO
Post-Soviet Europe
Turkey

Middle EastThe Gulf
Egypt and the Levant
North Africa

Russia and EurasiaThe South Caucasus
Central Asia
Post-Soviet Europe
Russia


 Sections menu 
Programs
Experts
Events
AnalysisBlogs
Books
Commentary
Congressional Testimony
Critical Questions
Interactive Reports
Journals
Newsletter
Reports
Transcript

Podcasts
iDeas Lab
Transcripts
Web Projects

 Main menu 
About Us
Support CSISSecuring Our Future


 


 

    Photo: TORU YAMANAKA/AFP/Getty Images  





 Transcript

 
Share
 LinkedIn
Facebook
Twitter
Email
Printfriendly.com
 
  

Africa's Global Reset: Foreign Relations in a Post-Pandemic Era
March 31, 2021
    Judd Devermont: Good morning. My name is Judd Devermont and I am the
    director of the Africa Program at the Center for Strategic and
    International Studies. And it’s my pleasure to welcome you to “Africa’s
    Global Reset: Foreign Relations in a Post-Pandemic World.” This event was
    made possible through the generous support of the Embassy of Japan.


    In the wake of the once-in-a-century pandemic, there’s an opportunity for
    sub-Saharan African countries and their external partners to establish more
    equitable, collaborative, and constructive relationships. However, if a
    reset is in the offing, Africans and their international partners need to
    be clear-eyed about the trends that are reshaping the region and the
    fallout from the past year. It’ll be necessary to manage expectations.
    There’s almost certainly going to be tensions and tradeoffs between what is
    needed, what is wanted, and what is possible in a post-COVID-19 world.


    As many of you know, the region so far has curbed a massive spread of
    COVID-19 but remains mired in an economic crisis. And it is vexed about
    insufficient assistance from the outside world. African governments and
    publics are asking for greater equity in vaccine distribution, more
    generous debt relief, and targeted investment in key economic sectors.
    Moreover, African leaders say they are fed up with the unequal treatment in
    the global community, the harassment of their citizens abroad, and the
    zero-sum premise of global power competition.


    So what is the way forward? How do we work together to speed the recovery
    from the pandemic and address the region’s crippling debt obligations? How
    do we tackle systemic racism which has led to discrimination towards
    Africans and African diaspora in China, the United States, Israel and the
    Middle East, as well as other parts of the world? How do we renew our
    commitment to democracy when the United States and many African countries
    are struggling with divisive politics, attacks on democratic institutions
    and media, and the rise of digital authoritarianism?


    How do we lower the temperature of zero-sum global rivalries? The United
    States and China, of course, are locked in a serious competition over
    values, and rules, and relationships. It is, as Secretary Blinken said, the
    biggest geopolitical competition of the 21st century, but can this process
    play out in a way that doesn’t negatively impact the region’s peace and
    prosperity? And finally, how do we respond to the challenges of climate
    change? How do we work together to mitigate the negative consequences of
    extreme weather for African economies and societies?


    And that’s a tremendous amount of things to get through in just 60 minutes,
    but I am very confident that we have the right group of panelists to ask
    hard questions and to supply insightful answers.


    Today I’m very fortunate to be joined by Andrew Alli, who is a partner and
    group CEO of SouthBridge. Andrew has been investing in Africa for the past
    20 years, most recently when he was CEO of the African Finance Corporation,
    where he was responsible for over $4.5 billion of investment made in 30
    countries.


    We’re also joined by Akunna Cook. She is the deputy assistant secretary of
    state for African affairs. She’s a seasoned diplomat, lawyer, and expert on
    public policy and political strategy. Akunna began her career at the State
    Department, where she served for almost 10 years as an economic and
    commercial officer in the U.S. Foreign Service.


    Bogolo Kenewendo is an African economist, managing director of Kenewendo
    Advisory. She is the former minister of investment, trade, and industry of
    Botswana. She is a nonresident fellow at the Center for Global Development
    and a member of the United Nations Secretary-General’s High-Level Panel on
    Digital Cooperation.


    And finally, Ambassador Koji Yonetani is the assistant minister for African
    affairs at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Japan. He was previously the
    deputy assistant minister for global issues within the Ministry of Foreign
    Affairs. As a foreign service professional with over 30 years of service,
    Ambassador Yonetani has served as Japan’s ambassador to Djibouti, as well
    as vice president of the Japan External Trade Organization, also known as
    JETRO.


    So today what we’re going to do, we’ll have a moderated panel and then
    we’ll have an opportunity for some Q&A. It’s very easy to share – to
    ask questions. Just go onto the event page website, click on the link, and
    then we’ll be able to answer your questions towards the end.


    So I want to start with Andrew and Bogolo. I’d like to hear your thoughts
    on the state of African countries’ foreign relations. In the wake of the
    pandemic, how are these relationships changing? What do African governments
    want from their foreign partners? How decisive are the issues of debt and
    vaccine access in shaping the future of these relationships?


    Andrew, why don’t I –


    Andrew Alli: Thanks, Judd.


    So I hope you can all hear me, because I think I’m having a few
    connectivity challenges. So thank you. I think that one thing that African
    governments and people would want, and I always hesitate to speak for
    Africa since there are 54 countries and probably a billion different
    opinions on every subject. But I think the one thing that Africans would
    like is actually really a reset in how Africa is seen and the relations
    with Africa post-pandemic. I think many of us get the feeling that Africa
    is very often seen in the context of something else.


    So, you know, someone’s policies towards Africa is shaped because, you
    know, China is doing something, or the U.S. is doing something, or somebody
    wants to get, you know, access to some resources, or, you know, we don’t
    like the sort of – none of us do – we don’t like some of the, you know,
    Islamic terrorists in the Maghreb. You know, it’s always about something
    that’s almost sort of external to Africa itself, rather than treating
    African countries, you know, almost as grown-ups, and really part of the
    world – the world system.


    So, you know, I would certainly like to see a reset along those lines. If
    one is looking at specific issues, I think you mentioned a number of them
    that are top of mind. So while we’ve – we seem to have managed to avoid
    some of the, you know, worst things we’ve seen in terms of vaccine – sorry
    – in terms of COVID mortality in places like the U.S. and the U.K. and
    other places, I think we are concerned about being locked out of the global
    economy, you know, because of lack of vaccines and things like that. If
    people start requiring vaccinations to – you know, to travel and to be part
    of the economy, then vaccine access becomes an issue.


    The other thing is that while we’ve avoided the disease elements of the
    pandemic, we haven’t been able to avoid the economic elements. And the
    whole thing about how do we, you know, help us to get us back onto our feet
    economically, how do we bring in new thinking? I mean, there’s somebody and
    I can’t remember who – I think it may have been Larry Summers or someone
    like that – said, look, all the developed countries have kicked economic
    orthodoxy out of the window, you know, for their own sort of COVID
    recoveries, but are still insisting on it for emerging economies.


    And we can see this around the debt relief. We can see this around the
    reluctance to do innovative things like, you know, the SDR program that has
    been mooted for the IMF. So I think that those are two of the things. And
    then the other thing is really how do we get put into the world economy
    post-COVID in a more constructive way that allows us to develop as
    countries, rather than just being the sort of football kicked between, you
    know, the West and China, if I can say that. And I’ll end there.


    Judd Devermont: Thank you, Andrew. That’s a great start.


    Bogolo, what are your thoughts? What can the U.S. – what can Africa’s
    international partners do to rest the relationship? How should they think
    through these issues of economic recovery and the vaccine?


    Bogolo Kenewendo: Right. A very good morning, good afternoon to everyone
    joining us today. As Andrew already said, you know, it’s very difficult to
    always just say “Africa,” considering that it’s not a really homogeneous
    group. However, some of our interests are so intertwined and are evidenced
    by the political will and the drive towards the AfCFTA. And I believe that
    that really shows the aspirations towards unification and working together
    in building better and in driving the development of the continent.


    Now, I just want to take us back to 2018, when, you know, there was this
    trade war, and it was so clear that Africa was caught in between the trade
    war. And it was so clear that there was one group that was looking for
    Africa’s attention. China was pulling in one direction. The U.S. was
    pulling in one – in another direction. And then the EU as well inserted
    itself in this conversation. And at the time, the interest in Africa was so
    strong, and you could see that it was all about geopolitical influence and
    power.


    And I think if we just look at the relations then and what was being pushed
    from the U.S., pushed from Europe, and from China really needs to speak for
    itself now, because you really want to see your partners – who your true
    partners are when you are in need. And there is evidence that has been put
    out by the World Bank, the IMF, whoever, and the AFDB that shows that right
    now African countries are stressed, basically. And they are having to
    assume debt in order to just provide and have COVID relief, in order to
    have some of the basic resources.


    You know, there was this study I was just reading that showed that at the
    beginning of COVID and the pandemic it was very difficult for some
    countries to institute a lockdown because there wouldn’t be water in the
    quarters where people are staying, there are no toilets, they have to stay
    in the public toilets. So to show true partnership, to go back to 2018 and
    2019, the things that were said, to say I’m your real partner, should be
    implemented and should really come to life. So that’s number one.


    And then the second one is so when we look at debt, and debt relief, and
    the package that has been put on the table by G-20, clearly it’s not
    working. It means it wasn’t enough. So we need to revisit that. Africa’s
    partners need to revisit that and make sure that they are in consultation
    with the beneficiaries in how that final package needs to look like in
    order for debt relief to effectively – or, that package to effectively work
    for the continent. Because it’s not just about saying, well, we’ll pardon
    you for this one year.


    But it has to be a time for long, you know, there’s going to be this debt
    relief, because we want to make sure that that capital is – (audio break) –
    for the vulnerable groups and to avoid economic scarring in the long term.
    I don’t want to talk about what the impacts could be if we don’t recover
    and other countries recover. We already see the impacts of immigration and
    ecomigration. And I don’t want to touch on that.


    And then the second one is on vaccination. While many – while many times we
    can talk about donations of vaccines, I think the real thing that is needed
    here is for us to have a global action program on vaccine distribution, to
    ensure that vaccinations are not just being hoarded by one group but are
    also being provided to countries that are least developed. And right now
    it’s very difficult when you think about Germany buying a vaccine for $2
    and then South Africa buying the same vaccine for $5, plus logistics.


    It just goes to show that we will always have those – the divide. And the
    divide, the inequalities, they are not going to – (audio break). Once
    again, a partnership is only – or, the world is only as strong as its
    weakest. So if we just work on a partnership towards vaccine distribution,
    a global action program on vaccine distribution, then – you know, I’m just
    challenging our partners to rise up to that.


    Judd Devermont: All right. Well, I have two of your partners on the line –
    Japan and the United States. So I’m going to turn to Ambassador Yonetani
    and then DAS Cook for their response. But Bogolo said, you know, how do you
    act as a true partner when there is need? So let me turn to you first,
    Ambassador. From Japan’s perspective, considering these issues about the
    need for innovative economic policy from – on the continent from the 54
    countries, considering the challenges of the debt packages that are not
    sufficient, what are Japan’s – what do you think as a representative of the
    Japanese government on how to move the relationship forward?


    Koji Yonetani: OK. Thank you very much. And it’s a great pleasure for me to
    be able to join the discussion. So – and the interesting and important,
    this juncture that we are facing a lot of challenges within the context of
    COVID, and also challenges of solidarity and how to revive and strengthen
    the multilateralism in the international community.


    In fact, the partnership and the relationship of all of us – of various
    international stakeholders and actors with the African countries is always
    something difficult in terms of – very often in putting some contexts – in
    relation to some broader global competition or confrontation. And from that
    point of view, I have to – I want to underline that since more than 25
    years ago – since 1993 Japan is willing to introduce a new perspective of
    putting Africans at the center of the discussion, trying to focus what are
    the challenges for African development, and putting the Africans at the
    driver’s seat to plan and envisage their ambitions, how to achieve that,
    what are necessary.


    And around that process of ownership – establishing ownership, it is the
    international partnership which is needed to be mobilized. And that’s the
    TICAD process. And of course, but I am glad to come back on that in the
    next subject. But regarding the situation, natural context of COVID-19, I
    think we have to look at the reality, what’s happening in the world and
    also on the African continent.


    First of all, I think it’s important to recognize the fact that Africa –
    African governments and people, are relatively doing very well compared to
    other places like in Japan, Europe, the U.S. The number of infections and
    the deaths are relatively small in terms of percentage. Of course, not all
    the numbers are counted probably, but still I think they have acted very
    quickly and mobilized well to take necessary measures to – as a response to
    the COVID-19. Of course, there are limitations of capacity, but in that
    regard we need to mobilize international support. And Japan has also
    contributed in that respect.


    Secondly, the challenge is not only health or medical aspect. There are a
    lot of – enormous spillover effects on economy and society. So that’s – on
    those aspects we need to build an international partnership, how to –
    relaunching and recovering better from those massive challenges. Fragility,
    vulnerabilities existing in the system before have been accentuated by the
    COVID-19. That’s what I think – I believe that we are seeing. And the –
    take the challenge and opportunity of innovation. That’s also necessary.
    The digital transformation and business opportunities to address the
    government needs. Those are the innovations and the opportunities we need
    to seize together with our partners.


    So I’ll stop there and thank you very much.


    Judd Devermont: Thanks, Ambassador. Akunna, let me turn to you to respond
    to the openings from Andrew and Bogolo, and hear your perspective on how
    the U.S. resets its relationship with African governments and publics, and
    particularly these issues around debt relief and vaccines. Where do you –
    where is the U.S. government on moving forward on these issues?


    Akunna Cook: Thank you again, Judd, for inviting me to be part of the
    august panel. It’s a pleasure to be talking about the U.S. relationship
    with Africa, and particularly this idea of a reset. The Biden-Harris
    administration is committed to creating a foreign policy for the middle
    class. What does that mean? It means that we have to be cognizant that what
    happens around the world affects the American people, just like what
    happens in the United States affects people around the world.


    In Africa in particular, we have had a strong partnership with the African
    continent based on what we believe to be shared values between American
    people and people on the African continent. So that’s – whether that’s in
    democracy and governance, or that’s in prosperity, or whether that’s
    health. COVID-19 has really just exposed how interconnected we are. A
    pandemic that is happening in Africa affects us here in the United States.
    We saw that with Ebola and we definitely saw that with COVID-19. And so to
    that end, the United States has been committed to ensuring that Africa has
    what it needs to overcome and heal from the pandemic. We’ve invested over
    $2 billion into the Global Vaccine Alliance. And we will do more.


    In terms of debt, you know, this is the first year in about 30 years that
    African economies have backslid. And so we are committed to ensuring that
    Africa can come out of this recession, just as America needs to come out of
    its own economic recession brought on by the pandemic. And so we support
    the efforts of the G-20 to provide debt relief through the World Bank, and
    IMF, and other international financial institutions. And we are committed
    to remaining a partner with Africa and truly – a true partnership that
    centers Africa’s needs, as Ambassador Yonetani mentioned, and centers
    African solutions to African problems. And to the extent that the United
    States can be a partner, can lead conversations, we’re committed to doing
    that as part of this administration.


    Judd Devermont: Thanks, Akunna.


    Let me pick up on two points that both – that all four of you raised as we
    – as we go into a second section, which is really thinking about
    multilateralism and some of the challenges of global discrimination. And
    what I heard from Ambassador Yonetani and from DAS Cook is that
    multilateralism versus – a reembracing of multilateralism on the U.S. side,
    a continued commitment on the Japanese side. And that’s one of the ways in
    which they’re going to address some of these issues around the economic
    challenges and around vaccine, at least through COVAX. And then Akunna
    mentioned, you know, the U.S. – the Biden-Harris administration being
    focused on connecting foreign policy to domestic policy. And I think some
    of these issues around systemic racism is one way in which we think about
    that.


    So let me first turn to Ambassador Yonetani again because you mentioned
    TICAD. I had the privilege of going to TICAD in the before days when you
    could actually go places. I went to Yokohama. You know, I think that TICAD
    is an incredibly important organization because it is multilateral, because
    it brings civil society into the engagement. But I’d like to hear your
    thoughts on where you’re going next. Where will be the next TICAD? What are
    the areas – you alluded to it earlier – that you think Japan wants to focus
    on for this reset with Africa? And then a little bit more about your
    partnerships with African governments, but with the United States, with
    Europe, with other countries. And how do you, again, we’re going to just
    keep going back to this theme, how do you push a reset?


    Koji Yonetani: OK, thank you very much for the second opportunity to come
    into this discussion in the first session. Before going into the TICAD,
    where we are, I want to come back on the vaccine supplies and then effort
    in relation to multilateralism. We believe that mobilizing the
    international solidarity for the sake of ensuring that all the countries
    have access to vaccine, it goes – it should go through multilateralism.
    That’s why we are working – since the beginning – working closely with the
    U.S. and other allies to establish a multilateral mechanism, including
    COVAX and other mechanisms to provide necessary response tools to the
    COVID.


    We shouldn’t – of course, we need every helping hand from all over the
    world. And no one should instrumentalize the tool of providing vaccine or
    other indispensable need to fight COVID in their other interests. So that’s
    why Japan has worked with others in contributing to COVAX and increasing
    the contribution since the beginning of this year up to $200 million U.S.
    dollars. So we will continue to do that.


    And if I may come back briefly to – on TICAD, I think that health sector,
    of course, is amongst the various areas of longstanding discussion in this
    framework. TICAD is not a bilateral Japan-African dialogue forum, but is a
    multilateral forum organized together with the U.N., UNDP, World Bank, and
    African Union. And we have been addressing various issues related to the
    economy, society, and peace and stability. And the basic important
    principles that we have established after very extensive discussion with
    African leaders at the beginning of the process, is ownership and
    partnership.


    So the countries, the governments of African countries should be at the
    driver’s seat, and international partners including Japan and others should
    look at how and what we can do to accompany their efforts. So in that –
    with those principles what we are aiming at is a long-term development,
    sustainable development, that should be achieved. And for that – for that
    purpose, what is essential is institution building and capacity building of
    the countries themselves. I agree that in the context of COVID this
    approach has proven to be very relevant, pertinent, because just
    distributing material – those kind of things doesn’t sort of bring about
    solutions. We need the institution, health workers, policymakers.


    And that has proven to be effective in various countries, including like in
    the – and if I may mention just only one example, in Ghana, Noguchi
    Memorial Institute, to which Japan has been working very closely with Ghana
    and other international partners, has proven to be very much active. They
    have implemented about 80 percent of PCR tests in Ghana. And they serve as
    a region hub also in response to COVID. So I think we will continue to work
    on that basis and, of course, addressing the newly emerging various
    challenges not only in health sector but also in various – maybe very often
    aggravating situation of socioeconomic context to build back better and
    with good governance. OK, thank you very much.


    Judd Devermont: Thanks, Ambassador. And you did mention in your opening
    remarks that there was also a focus on technology too, and what we can do
    in the tech sector. So I think, you know, medical, and health, and tech are
    key areas of focus. And I know that the U.S. is also focusing on health
    strengthening similar to the way Japan is, as opposed to other countries
    who are much more focused on providing equipment.


    But DAS Cook, I wanted to get to the second part of this section, which is
    around some of the challenges around systemic racism. The U.S. has been
    dealing with a racial reckoning this past year. And the Biden-Harris
    administration has pledged to mend some of these deep historic wounds at
    home and then address injustice and police brutality, you know, in the
    world. And so how is this playing out in the U.S.? How do you think – how
    will the government address African governments that have poor human rights
    records. How do we better support civil society? How do we have a better
    people-to-people relationship so End SARS protesters can talk to Black
    Lives Matter protesters. How do we have a better people-to-people
    relationship with thinking about these systemic challenges?


    And then, Andrew and Bogolo, you’re going to get to be able to tell them
    why they’re wrong or what else they’re missing in just a bit, so get ready.


    Akunna Cook: Judd, thank you for that question. The reality is that the
    multiracial democracy, the union, in fact, that we have been trying to
    perfect, is very much a work in progress. COVID-19 and the events of the
    last year have really exposed a lot of the vulnerabilities and a lot of the
    crises, frankly, that have been facing communities of color for generations
    in the United States. So we had a health crisis that played out where
    communities of color were being infected and dying at higher rates than
    White communities. We had a(n) economic crisis that saw Black and brown
    businesses going out of business, and sometimes permanently, and being
    least likely to receive assistance because of their lack of networks, that
    are perpetuated because of racism.


    We saw a democracy crisis. And we saw Black and brown people standing in
    line for four, five, six, seven, eight hours just to exercise their right
    to vote – a direct result of the voter suppression that has targeted these
    communities for years. And lastly, we did see police brutality playing out
    on our police – on our TV screens. And something that communities of color
    have been facing and talking about for years. And it took this particular
    crisis for the world – for the United States and for the world – to
    recognize that enough is enough.


    So I think that the events of the last year really do precipitate a reset
    in the way that the United States engages in the world. I think we have to
    approach the world, as Secretary Blinken has said, with a combination of
    humility and confidence. Humility, because we are very clear that we are
    not where we need to be. That there is a lot more room for improvement in
    terms of our domestic challenges around race. And it beyond personnel,
    although it does – although in terms of the foreign policy context it does
    include personnel in ensuring that our foreign policy establishment and
    that the folks who are creating and enacting our foreign policy actually
    reflect the American people – a more diverse American people.


    But it goes beyond that in terms of the way that we relate to countries.
    And again I bring it back to this humility, that says that we approach
    countries not with a bias from the past that does implement the old racial
    hierarchies, but one that recognizes that every country has something to
    learn and something to contribute to this project of creating democratic, a
    more free, a less authoritarian world, right? But we also approach this
    with confidence. I mean we see, right, with the election of our first Black
    and Indian vice president, in Vice President Kamala Harris, that there has
    been progress in the United States.


    And so we have confidence because we know that although we have yet to
    achieve the values and achieve the perfection that we keep at it. And so we
    approach our partners and say: To the extent that you, your people, share
    those values with us we will continue to fight for you and we will continue
    to advocate for democracy. We will continue to advocate for gender
    equality, racial equality. We will continue to speak out against brutality
    levied against people by their governments. And we will continue to protect
    the rights of LGBT individuals.


    And to your point, I think you’re exactly right. We have a vibrant civil
    society here in the United States that advocates for all of these issues.
    And I think that there’s a tremendous opportunity to partner with civil
    society in other countries who are fighting similar issues, because I think
    that when we do that as Americans, and lead by the power of example, we are
    strong and we’re in a better position to lead.


    Judd Devermont: Thanks, Akunna. Really powerful remarks. Of all the things
    that Amanda Gorman said, our youth poet laureate at the inauguration, the
    one that keeps coming back to me is that we are a nation that is
    unfinished. And I feel like that’s a way to think about our foreign policy
    as well, that we’re continuing to be open about our shortcomings and honest
    about our efforts to continue to perfect the way we deal with our partners.


    So I wanted to give Bogolo and Andrew an opportunity to respond – to
    respond to Ambassador Yonetani’s points about Japan’s focus and Akunna’s
    points about how the U.S. intends to engage with its partners. Are you
    looking for humility in that partnership? What would you like to see the
    focus be? What is the way forward? And I know both of you have been in
    government or at least in pseudo-government positions – at least I can call
    that, Andrew, the AFC that way. And so you know what it’s like to be a
    member of a public, but a member of a government as well. And so maybe
    we’ll go to Bogolo first. Just your reactions to what you’ve heard, and
    what kind of corrections or amendments or improvements you would add.


    Bogolo Kenewendo: Right. Thanks again, Judd.


    So, I mean, I have attended TICAD – the last TICAD meeting. And it was – it
    was actually very productive. A lot of issues – the right issues were being
    discussed at TICAD. And in particular, I mean, it was about good
    infrastructure, bringing it into the continent and ICT, and looking at
    newer financing models. And similarly, I’ve participated in the U.S.-Africa
    Summit, in 2019. Now, my advice – I mean, I accept what has been said. And
    these are priorities for countries. And it’s important for us as partners
    to recognize other people’s priorities as we want them to recognize ours.


    And you will recall earlier this year when we were asked how active do we
    think the Biden administration will be with African on the onset? And my
    response, honestly, at that time was, given the state of what’s happening
    in the U.S., and just as how Cook just said it, you know, you anticipate
    for someone to want to take care of home first before they take care of
    anywhere else. But what – in addition to that, what we’re looking for – and
    I think what would be really helpful for the – (audio break) – is just
    going back to the global action on vaccine rollout – that’s not just COVAX.
    That looks at the equitable distribution, less hawking of vaccine. You
    know, that is what will be important in making sure that we get the vaccine
    at the – (audio break) – price and at a speedy time. So that is just what I
    wanted to – (audio break) – particular issue.


    Now, the next issue in relation to the – to humility, I completely agree.
    Very needed. I could tell you all about how we dealt with – (audio break) –
    administration, but I think we can have a drink over that. (Laughs.) But
    the issue is the tone that has been used during the trade war, the tone
    that was used towards the continent, towards African presidents, was really
    – it lacked humility. And I think bringing back humility into the
    partnership, into conversations with African leaders, will really help to
    strengthen the partnership and make sure that the relationship moves
    forward.


    And when it comes to the economy and what Japan was – Yonetani was just
    talking about, Africa’s aspirations right now – as I mentioned in my
    opening – are all about unification, making sure that we trade together, we
    develop together. And when we look at that, we want our partners to also
    rise to the same ambitions, to recognize that our priorities now are more
    on the economic development on developing value chains, on infrastructure
    development that will facilitate that intra-African trade and, by
    extension, the rest of the world. Evidence points to that intra-Africa
    trade growing, the AFCFTA will not only benefit us in the continent but
    will also inject a sizable amount of capital into the world economy and
    into the trading system.


    So partners need to come up into those ambitions as well and see how they
    meet us into the ambitions so that when we talk about American priorities,
    Japanese priorities, and all of our partners’ priorities, we are able to
    mirror each other and really make sure that we’re working towards a working
    multilateral system. Because, again, that’s something that has been broken
    in the past couple of years. We’ve seen severed relationships, particularly
    the multilateral system hasn’t been functioning. And we are hoping that now
    we will see a little bit more movement at the – (audio break) – see a
    little bit more movement in Gavi and COVAX, and many others, how we relate
    to each other.


    Judd Devermont: I don’t know if it’s coming through but there’s a lot of
    vigorous nodding going on amongst all of us, especially with the AFCFTA,
    Bogolo.


    Andrew, let me give you a chance to respond here. You can also let us know
    we need a table for the post-event drink conversation as well, and we’ll
    just keep a running tab of things that we can’t say in public but we’re
    going to work through. Andrew.


    Andrew Alli: Great. Well, thanks. You know, the picture that Bogolo has
    behind her reminds me of a saying we have here in Nigeria, that when two
    elephants fight it’s the grass that suffers. And so, you know, when we see
    the sort of, you know, great power contests going on – and Bogolo refers to
    2018 and the trade war, I think of Alaska last week; I’m still digesting
    that – you know, we sort of wonder. And then, you know, when you think
    about how Africa really suffered during the Cold War – when, you know, it
    was sort of, you know, two other parties having a great-power fight, with
    the grass, being Africa, suffering – you know, it does worry me. And so I
    do – I do like what I hear about multilateralism. But of course, as another
    saying goes, actions speak a lot louder than words. So, you know, we would
    like to see that really translated into action.


    I think, just to – just to make a specific point on this, for example, you
    know, the COVAX program, and I think it’s great, but as my boss and founder
    of SouthBridge, Donald Kaberuka, said in his testimony to Congress last
    week, COVAX only covers about 20 percent of the African population. You
    need 60 percent to get to herd immunity. And you know, that’s why I found
    it very disappointing that most of the Western powers vetoed the moving the
    WTO around, expanding production of vaccines. And when you take that with,
    you know, hearing about countries that have, you know, 100 million more
    doses than they really need of the vaccine, you sort of wonder whether the
    rhetoric is really matching up with the actions.


    And again, you know, it comes back to the whole point about – you know,
    again, very good points that were made. The whole point about, you know,
    Africans charting their own course and really being allowed to be
    participants. And, you know, I mean I think that – to be frank, as an
    African I would like to see us doing more around actually manufacturing
    vaccines and, you know, developing IP on the continent, rather than just
    being given, you know, free doses of vaccines and things. Now, maybe you
    need the quick free doses of spare vaccines immediately to get yourself out
    of the worst of the pandemic. But, you know, how can this be used to sort
    of reinforce, build African economies, African value chains, African IP?


    And these things are all, in a way, self-serving for the people that would
    help us to get there, because, you know, a stronger Africa, a more vibrant
    Africa, a more joined-together Africa – I’m a very big fan of the Africa
    Free Trade Agreement as well – you know, becomes a more important and more
    useful and more valuable partner for those countries that help us, or those
    regions or multilateral organizations. So for me, it’s really just – you
    know, I mean, everything sounds fine.


    And you can’t really gainsay what is being said, but, you know, I’d just
    like to see these things translated into real actions that, you know, have
    a real benefit and a real reset of the relations with the African
    continent, which I think going back to where we were at some point – you
    know, maybe it’s not bad, but I’d like us really to think forward about,
    you know, what new relationships. How can we reset we even think about the
    relationship with each other?


    Judd Devermont: Thanks, Andrew. Well, I think we’re going to have an
    opportunity to do that in this final section, where I think there is an
    opportunity to really create new pathways around how we approach climate
    change. It’s a focus of the Biden-Harris administration. It’s a focus of
    the Japanese government. It’s a focus of many African governments and
    publics. And so we’ll just spend a little time on climate change. And then
    we’ll open it up to questions from our audience. It’s very easy, once
    again, to submit questions. Just go to our event page, click on the tab,
    and then we’ll be able to ask our esteemed panelists.


    But, Bogolo, why don’t I go back to you and get your sense on climate
    change? We all know that Africa’s contributions to global greenhouse gas
    emissions are so small relative to the rest of the world, and yet Africa’s
    countries are the ones that are most vulnerable to it and perhaps least
    prepared for a response to extreme weather patterns. So from your – from
    your point of view, what should African governments be doing domestically
    to address climate change? And what kind of partnerships are they looking
    for?


    Bogolo Kenewendo: Yeah. I mean, it is estimated actually that about $20 to
    $30 billion U.S. will be needed in the next 20 years for African countries
    to work on mitigation and adaptation measures around climate change. And
    this is mainly because, as you rightfully said, the continent is going – is
    being already severely affected by climate change. Floods everywhere. I
    mean, we’ve had rain since December and still up to now, which is really
    irregular. And others are experiencing droughts when they’re supposed to be
    in their rainy season. And this is really affecting food security and it’s
    affecting issues around settlements as well – so provision of housing and
    so forth.


    So the cost to the continent is really more instability. And African – I
    know some of the thought around adaptation is now using solar energy. And
    we are seeing some of the programs from the U.S., this Power Africa that is
    now here trying to help connect solar panels all over African households. I
    know that they’re negotiating a deal there. So these are some of the
    aspirations, setting up power plants. There’s something else happening in
    Ethiopia. But beyond that, it is about going back to private sector. See, I
    think – and this is because I believe in the role of the private sector in
    development.


    So I believe that most African countries, what they should be focused on is
    how to provide a conducive environment that encourages innovation – (audio
    break) – mitigating climate change issues, and such that other partners can
    come in and slot themselves in an – (audio break) – in development, and –
    (audio break) – feel that this is a space that allows them to be innovative
    in delivering measures towards climate change. So I – (audio break) – look
    at climate change from different aspects. But I like to look at it from an
    economic point of view. What happens if we don’t deal with it? Who’s going
    to eat? Who’s going to move? What are we going to do economically?


    And so it’s important that – (audio break) – to the issues now before we
    are pushed to them later. And, you know, similarly with digitization we’ve
    seen that in the past just two years ago really most African countries
    didn’t want to talk about the digital economy. But now we are forced to by
    COVID. And it is a very tight space to be in for you to wait to be forced
    into something and be more reactionary, rather than having been more
    proactive to the issues that you know that are coming.


    Judd Devermont: Thank you. That’s, I think, really wise words.


    Akunna, President Biden, when he was a candidate, said he was going to
    spend much more time and resources on climate adaption in sub-Saharan
    Africa. We know next month there will be a big summit around climate
    change. So can you preview a little bit of what the Biden-Harris
    administration’s approach towards climate change in Africa will be? And
    particularly, how do you think – how do we deal with the fact that many of
    these countries have considerable debt right now trying to recover from
    COVID and also shifting towards green economies? What is the way in which
    the U.S. government can be helpful here?


    Akunna Cook: Yeah. So the Biden-Harris administration has been committed to
    confronting the crisis that is climate change. And it’s another example of
    where our domestic priorities meet our foreign policy priorities. We know
    that even here in the United States that many of the communities that are
    most affected by climate change, and therefore are also the same
    communities that are least resourced and able to mitigate the effects of,
    whether it be floods, droughts, extreme weather events. The same thing is
    playing out in Africa.


    And so we, you know, day one, rejoined the Paris climate agreement. In
    terms of our engagement in Africa, I agree with a lot of what Bogolo said.
    This is going to require governments but also private sector engagement to
    ensure that African countries have the resources that they need, but also
    that we’re taking advantage of the innovation that is available in the rest
    of the world, but the brilliance and innovation that is on the continent
    itself. We know that African businesses, African – the private sector needs
    support, and that we have to support their resourcing because that is the
    way that we can capitalize on the innovation that will help to steer their
    economies towards more green energy sources.


    The other thing I’ll say about climate is we know that our ability to
    present a green world for our children really depends on the investments
    that we’re making today. Bogolo referenced Power Africa, which has – which
    is the U.S. flagship program working on bringing power to the – to the
    African continent. To date, we have brought power to 18 million homes and
    will continue to do – to facilitate additional deals. And we’re continuing
    to evaluate how we can supplement what we’ve been doing with Power Africa
    to ensure that the African continent is a place that African businesses can
    thrive, U.S. businesses can thrive, and that they’re doing it in a way that
    is sustainable.


    And so we are approximately 63 days into the administration. And climate is
    a top focus. You’ve heard the president say it. You’ve heard the vice
    president. You’ve heard Secretary Blinken say it. And our attention to this
    climate summit that you referenced, Judd, is another example of the tension
    that’s being paid to it. So Africa will definitely be a part of this
    conversation. And our ability to mobilize all of our partners around
    climate is going to remain a top priority because it is such an existential
    crisis here at home as well as abroad, including in Africa.


    Judd Devermont: Thanks, Akunna.


    We’re going to do just a quick, short response from Andrew and from
    Ambassador Yonetani. And then we’ve already got a bunch of questions in.
    So, Andrew, why don’t I turn to you, if there’s anything you want to add
    here on climate change and what Africa and its international partners
    should be doing together.


    Andrew Alli: Yeah. So I think climate change and climate financing can be
    one of the biggest economic opportunities for the African continent, but
    also if handled incorrectly can be a big disaster as well. Economic
    opportunities not just because, you know, given how far back we are in
    particularly electricity, we can – I hate to use the word “leapfrog” – but
    we can sort of adopt the latest, most efficient technology to meet our
    power needs. And in the same way, also sort of help to reverse some of the
    economic damage – sorry – environmental damage that has been done by
    climate change or climate change-related things.


    So, for example, you know, like Lake Chad has shrunk by about 90 percent in
    the last, you know, 100 years or so. Maybe not entirely due to climate
    change, but climate change is a big factor. And this is, you know, at least
    one of the causes of a lot of things that are happening in the Sahelian
    region, particularly north – in the north of Nigeria, where I live. On the
    other hand, I think forcing African countries to move to a sort of
    renewables-only power strategy when that may not be the best option for
    them – especially given they lack a lot of baseload power which most other
    regions have. And, you know, in many cases the best source of baseload
    power is gas.


    I think that that may be sort of moving too fast and too prematurely and
    may do a lot of damage. I mean, you see, for example, the costs of
    operating Kenya’s grid have gone up considerably because of the large
    amounts of renewables that are on that grid relative to the baseload that
    they have. So that’s why I said it could be a huge opportunity but, if
    handled badly, it could be a disaster and set things back. And so a very
    careful course needs to be set. But, you know, it is something that is
    happening. And I think that the other point I would just make is around,
    again, it’s not just a question of how African – and Africa and Africans
    can change their electricity mix. It’s actually how can they become a part
    of the climate change economy?


    You know, so rather than just, I don’t know, buying the panels from country
    X, how can the panels be manufactured here? How can we be a part of that
    economy? I mean, other than, you know, in the normal way of sending our raw
    materials off somewhere else to be processed and sent back to us. So I
    think those are the things we need to think – that’s maybe the second-order
    way of looking at climate change. Thanks.


    Judd Devermont: I think that’s great, Andrew.


    Ambassador Yonetani, just quickly, what is – from the Japan government’s
    perspective.


    Koji Yonetani: Thank you. Yeah. I’m very much glad that people are talking
    about this climate change issue, and then also the role of private sector,
    the opportunity created by the launching of the African continent FTA.
    Those are really the issues that we should be starting to look at
    throughout the – throughout the preparation process and the discussion in
    the TICAD – the TICAD version eight year, to be held in Tunis. I believe
    that the Japanese private sector stakeholders, together with others
    including in Africa and in other countries, can play an important role to
    address the challenges of climate change and also creating a value chain,
    supply chain, integrating the African economy into the global economy.
    That’s the common challenge that we share amongst all the countries. Not
    only regional – the one region, another region, but worldwide.


    And in terms of climate change, I would like to recall that our Prime
    Minister Suga has made an announcement that Japan will also aim at
    realizing a decarbonized society by bringing the greenhouse gas emission
    overall to zero by 2050. And so he is stressing that we have to change the
    mindset to the notion that addressing environmental needs – reducing carbon
    emissions – is not a cost creator, but it’s an opportunity to develop new
    technologies and utilizing in a good manner to create new economy. And I
    think African continent is one of the big stage where various actors should
    work together to create this – to realize this opportunity, at the same
    time providing access to power, creating value chains, and also maintaining
    the target of zero carbon emission.


    Of course, that’s very much challenging in terms technology development and
    how to implement it. But it’s a challenge that we need to address jointly.
    So that’s – Japan particularly wants to be amongst the partners, both from
    public government side and from the private sector side. And so we want to
    promote and mobilize our private sector through this TICAD process. So
    thank you very much.


    Judd Devermont: Thank you, Ambassador. And I think that perfectly aligns
    with what Andrew and Bogolo said.


    All right, figure this math out: We have two minutes, two questions, four
    panelists. Here we go. I’m going to do – these are the two that I really
    thought were fantastic. So this is – Fakhrriyyah Hashim from the African
    Leadership Center asks: Should there be optimism with the presence of an
    African WTO head? Can that shape Africa’s relationship with advanced
    economies, given the COVAX vote? And so I think maybe Andrew and Bogolo you
    can help us with that question.


    And then the second – the last question maybe DAS Cook you can do that for
    us. But what are the implications of Africa’s pro-democracy movements, such
    as End SARS, in a post-COVID era? How can these movements form
    relationships with foreign partners? And what can they teach African
    governments? And that’s from Juliet Fugara from Harvard University. So why
    don’t we do Andrew, Bogolo, and then we’ll end with Akunna.


    Andrew Alli: So obviously, as a Nigerian, I very much welcome Ngozi
    Okonjo-Iweala taking over as head of the WTO. I think it’s great to see an
    African and a woman in that position. And you know, we need global
    leadership for trade, as has been mentioned. And I think Ngozi is a global
    leader. So from that – from that extent I’m very pleased and, you know,
    very optimistic.


    However, I think we also need to understand that the WTO is a big,
    multilateral organization. And therefore, moving it is kind of like moving
    a supertanker. It’s not something that’s going to, you know, spin around on
    its axis. It’s going to take time. And it’s going to need to be launched.
    But hopefully – and I believe she will – Ngozi will be able to make that
    organization and launch trade in a direction that is more inclusive than it
    has been. Less discriminatory. I don’t – I don’t really take either as
    anything massively positive or massively negative from the vaccine
    turndown. I now look to see how things develop over a longer timeframe.


    Judd Devermont: Thanks, Andrew.


    Bogolo.


    Bogolo Kenenwendo: Yeah. I mean, we were all very excited when Dr. Ngozi
    was appointed as the DG of the WTO. It’s a great feat. We are excited, and
    everyone should be excited. And the – you know, just like Andrew said, the
    WTO is such a big organization. And I think at the heart of it what’s
    important for us to recognize is there could be good leadership in the
    organization, look at it as a secretariat, that could be pushing,
    implementing what it has been given cue by the members. Because the WTO is
    a members’ organization. And the secretariat works from cue of the members.
    So she will push what she can, but it will also require for the membership
    – for the member states to want to see change.


    The WTO in itself and the secretariat before has been accused of having
    biases and not tabling all issues from all partners at the same time or
    giving them priority. So hopefully the change that we will see with an
    African head in the WTO is less bias in the issues that are being tabled at
    the WTO or the ones that have been expedited to being heard at the WTO. But
    as for every other thing, how the – how member states agree to new issues
    or agree to old substantive issues, for example, from the Doha Round, that
    is up to them. That is up to them if they want to move forward with issues
    of subsidies or not. It is up to member states if they want to move forward
    with the digital economy or not. And they need to support her in order to
    see the WTO succeed.


    Once again, I think it’s a little worrying that we only have the FTA to
    show for the WTO. And that’s the TFA, the Trade Facilitation Agreement. So
    we need to do more. But I would like to end on a positive, because I feel
    like I just said a lot of things, like, we need member states to do this.
    But I – in the last couple of days we’ve also seen a little bit of
    positivity coming back into the WTO, talking about rebuilding the appellate
    body. And I thought, OK, so one thing at a time. And we will celebrate the
    small steps, the small milestones that come. But this COVID, what we’re
    seeing with the vaccine, I hope is not indicative of the protectionist
    policies that member states of the WTO will continue to implement
    post-COVID, because that will only harm the world economy even more and
    ensur that no one actually rebounds back better.


    Thanks, Judd. And thank you, everyone, for a good afternoon.


    Judd Devermont: Thank you.


    Akunna, on the pro-democracy questions? I know we’re running just a little
    over time, so we’ll be brief.


    Akunna Cook: OK, so I’ll speak quickly. So we absolutely welcome the
    pro-democracy movements taking place across Africa and the rest of the
    world. You mentioned the various movements, including End SARS, but of
    course also here in the United States the Black Lives Matter movement.
    There are benefits and drawbacks of technology, but I think that one of the
    great benefits is that it’s easier to link – to, one, create and strengthen
    civil society movements – civil society and create movements online. It’s
    also easier to link civil society in countries. So it’s easier for, you
    know, anti-police brutality efforts to be linked – here in the United
    States – to be linked to those around the world.


    And so I believe that by taking advantage of the place that we are in the
    world and the – and the time that we are in now, trying to come out of this
    pandemic and trying to come out of the exposures that we’ve seen in terms
    of the shortcomings in our democracy, I think that that gives us some
    opportunity to really strengthen our commitments to democracy, and so put
    governments who are not aligned with those values on notice that a new day
    is arriving and that people are no longer going to be oppressed by
    governments that are not sharing these commitments to democracy and a free
    civil society.


    Judd Devermont: Thanks, Akunna.


    Ambassador Yonetani, any closing remarks?


    Koji Yonetani: No, thank you very much. I think it’s a very exciting
    discussion we had. And I think – I hope that we would continue to work
    together between Japan, U.S., and other partners on the common issues that
    we are facing on the continent of Africa, but the common issues that we are
    sharing, I think, on the global scene. Thank you very much.


    Judd Devermont: Thank you. I think that’s well-said.


    Let me thank again our panelists, especially let me thank the Embassy of
    Japan for their support for this event and the report that we published
    late last year. I’ll just summarize some of the things that I heard. We
    need to approach these relationships with humility. We need to celebrate
    small steps. We need to reinvest in multilateralism, particularly around
    the CFTA. Africa’s partners need to do way more than just support COVAX.
    And then in thinking about how do African countries fit into the African
    climate change economy.


    And I’ll end with a quote from Sekou Toure – that doesn’t happen much in
    2021 – but Seko Toure said, “Don’t judge us by what others say or what we
    say, but by what we do.” And I think that’s an important message for
    Africa’s foreign partners to think about. You’re going to be judged by what
    you do, not by what you say.


    Thanks to everyone and have a great day.


    (END)
 

 
Downloads
 Download Transcript 

Media Queries
 Contact H. Andrew Schwartz Chief Communications Officer Tel: 202.775.3242
 Contact Caleb Diamond Media Relations Manager and Editorial Associate Tel: 202.775.3173

  




  Footer menu 
Topics
Regions
Programs
Experts
Events
Analysis
Web Projects
Podcasts
iDeas Lab
Transcripts
About Us
Support Us

 
  Contact CSIS Email CSIS
Tel: 202.887.0200
Fax: 202.775.3199
 Visit CSIS Headquarters 1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
 Media Queries Contact H. Andrew Schwartz Chief Communications Officer Tel: 202.775.3242
 Contact Caleb Diamond Media Relations Manager and Editorial Associate Tel: 202.775.3173

 
  Daily Updates Sign up to receive The Evening, a daily brief on the news, events, and people shaping the world of international affairs.Subscribe to CSIS Newsletters  Follow CSIS 
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
YouTube
Instagram


 

All content © 2021. All rights reserved.
Legal menu 
Credits
Privacy Policy
Reprint Permissions




 

