





















Toward a Climate-Driven Trade Agenda | Center for Strategic and International Studies















































Skip to main content






Sections
Search






Center for Strategic & International Studies



  User menu 
Subscribe
Sign In

 



  Topics 
Climate Change
Cybersecurity and TechnologyCybersecurity
Data Governance
Intelligence, Surveillance, and Privacy
Military Technology
Space
Technology and Innovation

Defense and SecurityCounterterrorism and Homeland Security
Defense Budget
Defense Industry, Acquisition, and Innovation
Defense Strategy and Capabilities
Geopolitics and International Security
Long-Term Futures
Missile Defense
Space
Weapons of Mass Destruction Proliferation

EconomicsAsian Economics
Global Economic Governance
Trade and International Business

Energy and SustainabilityEnergy, Climate Change, and Environmental Impacts
Energy and Geopolitics
Energy Innovation
Energy Markets, Trends, and Outlooks

Global HealthFamily Planning, Maternal and Child Health, and Immunizations
Multilateral Institutions
Health and Security
Infectious Disease

Human RightsCivil Society
Transitional Justice
Human Security

International DevelopmentFood and Agriculture
Governance and Rule of Law
Humanitarian Assistance
Human Mobility
Private Sector Development
U.S. Development Policy


 Regions 
AfricaNorth Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa

AmericasCaribbean
North America
South America

Arctic
AsiaAfghanistan
Australia, New Zealand & Pacific
China
India
Japan
Korea
Pakistan
Southeast Asia

EuropeEuropean Union
NATO
Post-Soviet Europe
Turkey

Middle EastThe Gulf
Egypt and the Levant
North Africa

Russia and EurasiaThe South Caucasus
Central Asia
Post-Soviet Europe
Russia


 Sections menu 
Programs
Experts
Events
AnalysisBlogs
Books
Commentary
Congressional Testimony
Critical Questions
Interactive Reports
Journals
Newsletter
Reports
Transcript

Podcasts
iDeas Lab
Transcripts
Web Projects

 Main menu 
About Us
Support CSISSecuring Our Future


 


 

    Photo: JOHANNES EISELE/AFP/Getty Images  





 Transcript

 
Share
 LinkedIn
Facebook
Twitter
Email
Printfriendly.com
 
  

Toward a Climate-Driven Trade Agenda
March 6, 2021
    William Alan Reinsch: Well, let’s get started. I think the rush of
    attendees is continuing, but it’s slowed down just a little bit. And rather
    than keep all of you that are on waiting, let’s begin.


    It’s a real privilege to do this today. It’s an important issue. Those of
    you that follow CSIS know that we’ve been writing about it. And one of the
    things that we focused on thanks to Sarah Ladislaw, the head of our energy
    and climate program, is the intersection between climate policy and trade
    policy. We now have an administration that is very much seized with a more
    aggressive approach on climate than we’ve seen for the last four years.


    So things are going to happen. And one of the things that we realized early
    was that climate people and trade people don’t always travel in the same
    circles and they don’t always speak the same language. We both have
    languages of acronyms. And, you know, for trade people it’s numbers. It’s
    301, it’s 201, it’s 232. The environmentalists have COP-26 and they have
    UNFCC – too many Cs – FCCCC – three Cs, I think. I don’t speak that
    language.


    And one of the things we’re trying to do at CSIS is get the two sides
    together, if you will, to have a dialogue, to figure out how we can move
    forward on climate in a way that reinforces trade, and how to make sure
    that the trade rules are facilitators and not obstacles to dealing more
    effectively with climate change.


    And fortunately we have a keynote at our event, someone who’s been able to
    straddle both sides of the debate, which is rare in this town, and that’s
    Representative Earl Blumenauer, who is the chair of the Trade Subcommittee
    of the House Ways and Means Committee. That also is spokesman for
    environmental issues for a long time. And I don’t think you can see the
    bicycle on his lapel from here, but he’s well-known for it. And there he
    goes. And I think is, you know, well-known as an environmental leader in
    Congress, as well as the chair of the Trade Subcommittee.


    So he’s in a unique position to comment on how we think things are going to
    move forward. So we’re going to start with him. And he’s going to make some
    remarks. And then he’ll join the panel and we’ll have a conversation with
    the panel, and then we’ll get to participant questions after that. And you
    know how to do that. The signup sheet for the event told you how to submit
    your questions. And they’ll all be sent on to me. And we’ll ask as many as
    we can, but there will not be enough time to get to everybody.


    So with that, I’ll turn it over to Congressman Blumenauer. Go ahead.


    Representative Earl Blumenauer (D-OR):
    
    Well, thank you, Bill. Thanks for the opportunity to be part of this
    conversation. Thanks for the good work that you folks do, CSIS, and for
    your counsel over the years to help me understand some of the intricacies.
    You may not speak the same language, but I like the language you speak.
    It’s clear and direct and extraordinarily helpful.


    The last five years we’ve witnessed a major – I think, a major trade reset.
    I mean, think Trump, Bernie Sanders, Hillary; some ambiguity about where
    Vice President Biden was in the campaign. We’ve watched that the consensus
    moving towards the Trans-Pacific Partnership kind of evaporated and
    positions changed. They hardened. And we had sort of a chaotic situation
    with Donald Trump and drive-by tariffs and certain things that were just
    nonsensical. And we sort of had one approach to try and solve problems.


    We were able, with Ambassador Lighthizer, I think, to make some significant
    progress with NAFTA 2.0. That was something that was a priority for me to
    be able to see if we can bring people together to solve problems and see if
    we can deal with differences. I can’t tell you how many hours I spent
    talking to everything that looked like a caucus, any three people in the
    House, but it worked. We actually had a majority of Democrats support this
    trade agreement; a consensus on enforcement, some real progress on
    environmental issues. And I think it sets the stage for where we go from
    here.


    I think that the president is recalibrating through climate laws and
    looking at things through the lens of climate and the American worker. If
    you listen to Katherine Tai, our late chief trade counsel, she laid that
    out. And I think that that’s – I think that’s an appropriate lens, which
    helps us make some real progress.


    It’s an opportunity, for example, to start taking action, set the table, as
    you’ve referenced in your report, dealing with the ripening of the issue
    dealing with subsidies for fisheries. That’s been languishing, but the case
    is clear. There’s a keen interest for trading partners to see if we can get
    our arms around that. And I think there’s an opportunity to use that as a
    springboard.


    China remains to be a conundrum. We’re sort of inextricably linked with
    them. We can’t live with them; we can’t live without them. They’ve made
    huge progress in the low-carbon future. But they continue to be a really
    difficult case in terms of slave labor, which we’re going to be spending
    time on in the subcommittee, that’s just beyond tomatoes and cotton. It’s
    the abuse of the WTO process, procurement. They’re still a developing
    economy. Give me a break – the use of their state-owned enterprises and a
    bottomless pool of subsidized investment.


    America can’t deal with these challenges alone. Luckily, we do have
    partners that are poised to be cooperative. We share the interests in terms
    particularly with the EU; climate, labor standards. I think there’s
    progress possible in digital trade, where we again have many similar
    issues, and a relationship with China.


    I think that there are business and trade solutions to the climate crisis
    that we face now. And I can’t tell you how excited I am to work with
    Ambassador Tai, who demonstrated a facility to be able to communicate,
    think big picture. She will be a tireless champion of the administration’s
    policies.


    The team dealing with climate is very strong. Gina McCarthy we’ve worked
    with in the prior administration. She’s tasked internally; Secretary Kerry.
    I’ve enjoyed conversations with both of them already. And having somebody
    with Kerry’s stature and experience, I think, bodes well.


    What happens in this space over the next 20 years is going to tell the
    truth about whether or not we’re going to be able to survive life as we
    know it. And what’s going to happen with the next 46 months of this Biden
    administration is going to tell the story. But I think in the next four
    months we’re going to set the stage for the climate and trade program while
    we’re fighting the COVID crisis and trying to resuscitate the economy.


    I could not be more pleased with the work you’ve done with your blueprint.
    I anticipate that there’s a lot of opportunities working with you and our
    subcommittee.


    Clearly, the notion of reviewing the TPA and domestic trade law, your
    specific recommendations there.


    I love the notion of just establishing a climate-driven agenda with the
    European Union. We’ve had preliminary conversations with them and we will
    be having more.


    Dealing with APEC trade discussions later this year to try and jumpstart
    some things, perhaps, with the fish subsidies. I like the notion of just
    cutting to the chase and negotiate a climate waiver. It’s to enact how we
    meet our Paris responsibilities, which the administration mercifully joined
    the first day they were in office.


    And clearly, secure critical – the supply chains for rare-earth minerals.
    We all have a stake in that. We’ve been dancing around it. We’ve refused to
    make the sort of investment that might be necessary to compete with the
    Chinese. And clearly, the world trade agenda is wanting in that case.


    I think what, Bill, you and David have done with this report is a great
    blueprint. I’m looking forward to working with you on it, and I’m looking
    forward to the conversation here today as part of an area where there will
    be substantive progress with this administration. Joe Biden campaigned on
    it. He started organizing instantly. He’s got a great team in place, and I
    think they’re willing to make some tough stands. And we, at least
    initially, look like we’re going to bring through some resources. There are
    some opportunities here, I think, even potentially on a bipartisan basis. I
    look forward to working with some of the areas that you’ve outlined because
    I think it gives us a point of departure that’s very constructive, and I
    appreciate it.


    Mr. Reinsch: Well, thank you very much. That’s really good opening remarks
    that also set the table.


    Let me introduce the panel. David Victor has one of the longest titles I’ve
    ever seen. He’s a professor at the University of California San Diego,
    Center for Global – Center for Global Transformation and the endowed chair
    in innovation and public policy; and also, co-director of the Laboratory on
    International Law and Regulation.


    Warren Maruyama has a much shorter partner. He’s a partner at Hogan
    Lovells, a national law firm. Also, former general counsel at the Office of
    U.S. Trade Representative and well-known to the many trade wonks that are
    on this meeting.


    So we now have three of you because the congressman’s joining the panel.
    Let me start out with kind of the cosmic question that sort of underlines
    all of this: Are we really – is there really an inevitable clash here
    between the rules – the trade rules and good climate policy, or is there a
    path to get where – get where Congressman Blumenauer says we want to go?
    I’m just – and if there is a path – well, I guess, talk to us a little bit
    about what that is. We need to get a little bit more specific. So, if –
    David, do you want to go first?


    David Victor: Sure. Well, thank you, Bill. And thank you, Congressman. It’s
    really terrific to be with everyone here at CSIS via Zoom.


    I think there’s not an inevitable clash. You can imagine a world where
    we’re strategic about this and we’re careful and cooler heads prevail. That
    maybe is a world that doesn’t exist, but it’s not inevitable that we’re
    going to have a clash. There is going to be a connection, though. There’s
    no way that if we get really serious about the climate problem we’re not
    going to have to deal with trade effects because a lot of actions on
    climate are expensive. They affect competitiveness, especially in
    energy-intensive and export-oriented industries. And so that’s going to
    drive the big attention on the trade agenda. That’s what’s going on in
    Europe with all the talk about border carbon adjustments in Europe, and
    it’s now, I think, getting real – real threats and now, potentially, real
    action.


    And the last thing I would say about this is I think the way forward is to
    recognize that both the trade agenda and the climate agenda have a kind of
    chaotic policy right now where you’ve got fragmentation of global
    institutions and lots of other pressures on them. And so both are working
    now in smaller groups to try and really make progress, and it’s in those
    smaller groups we’re going to work out things like what are reasonable
    trade measures and also, I would say, investment measures, and how to put
    them into practice to keep them not discriminatory. The U.S.-European
    relationship’s going to be vitally important here because it’s hard to
    imagine us working this out carefully with any other partner except the
    Europeans.


    Mr. Reinsch: I want to get back to Europe.


    But, Warren, why don’t you open as well?


    Warren Maruyama: Yeah. And thanks, Bill and Sarah, for organizing this
    thing. I’m a big birdwatcher, and my birding magazines are – right now are
    full of articles about the impact of climate change on bird populations. So
    this event is very timely from both a professional and a personal
    perspective.


    And it’s an honor to be on the panel with Chairman Blumenauer, who’s been a
    leader on the trade issues. I’ve still got scars from my time at USTR on
    the May 10th agreement, but we eventually did work out a template for
    moving forward with the labor and environmental issues. I’d agree very much
    with David that the short answer is climate change and trade don’t really
    clash. There’s no inherent conflict, and to the extent there is some
    limited conflict it depends on what type of climate change mechanism that
    you’re talking about.


    So there’s nothing in the World Trade Organization or any of our trade
    agreements that prevents a government from taking whatever steps it wants
    to do to control carbon emissions through a nondiscriminatory, regulatory
    cap-and-trade or carbon tax scheme. The trade problem, as David said, comes
    with respect to border measures, where some types of carbon control regimes
    are much easier to square with WHO rules than others. So if you restrict
    carbon emissions through a tax, a regulatory, or trade scheme, it’s going
    to drive up the cost of energy and disadvantage energy-intensive U.S.
    industries.


    And some of these industries are also trade intensive, in that they either
    face stiff import competition or they’re big exporters, or in some cases
    they’re both. So any sort of carbon regime that drives up the price of
    energy is going to put some big U.S. industries at a competitive
    disadvantage. And here we’re talking about things like steel, aluminum,
    chemicals, paper, cement, fertilizers, and there’s a longer list. So these
    are big politically potent industries that represent a lot of manufacturing
    jobs.


    So just about every carbon regimes involves – or, a politically viable
    carbon regime – involves some sort of border measure to make sure that
    imports from other countries don’t have an equivalent – that don’t have an
    equivalent carbon regime don’t get an unfair competitive advantage, and
    also to ensure that U.S. exporters don’t become uncompetitive because of
    their higher energy costs and start getting crowded out of foreign markets.


    It’s also important for any carbon regime to prevent leakage, so we don’t
    inadvertently create incentives for U.S. companies to move energy-intensive
    production overseas, costing U.S. jobs, or for production of certain, you
    know, globally traded products or commodities to shift to countries that
    are laggards in measures to reduce carbon. So that’s where the trade
    problem comes in, because it means doing something to level the playing
    field with imports and make sure our big exporters don’t get killed.


    Mr. Reinsch: Well, that’s a big challenge. Congressman, do you want to
    weigh in, or have you already weighed in?


    Rep. Blumenauer: Well, let me just say that I think there are opportunities
    here to be able to harmonize those objectives. Warren was talking about a
    number of very energy-intense industries. But those, for example, are
    heavily involved with our infrastructure agenda, which is a high priority
    of the administration. There is a commitment by the administration and
    Congress to have a low-carbon future, to rebuild and renew – rebuild and
    renew greener, things that we can do in terms of the manufacturing process
    – low-carbon concrete.


    I think there are opportunities here for us to be able to reach a
    reasonable accord and be able to transition into these things. There are –
    there will be winners and losers, but we’re going to be spending, I think,
    a lot of money on infrastructure. And getting the trade equation right is
    going to create a lot of value if we’re able to help focus where that value
    is created and how it moves. And I do think that there are similar
    interests with the European Union in particular that we – it’s in both our
    interests to be able to work this through. So I don’t minimize the
    problems. I lived through our cap-and-trade adventure – (laughs) – 10 years
    ago in the Obama administration. But I think there are enough moving pieces
    here, and enough developments have taken place, that we can see this
    low-carbon future and a way to harmonize those things going forward.


    Mr. Reinsch: You mentioned the EU. And I’m glad you did because David
    mentioned them as well. And obviously this is – you know, this is a global
    commons problem. It’s going to demand global solutions. The EU is well down
    the road to sorting out what it wants to do and we’re not. We’ve had four
    years of denial, basically, about the policy. So I think we start behind.
    Does that make any difference? Are we going to end up simply doing the same
    thing they’re doing, or how do you see that negotiation developing? Any of
    you.


    David.


    Mr. Victor: Well, let me just start there and say the EU has become the
    reliable leader on climate internationally. And we’re sometimes there and
    we’re sometimes not there. And the credibility of the country, our country,
    has gone down. And that’s a problem for us and so on.


    I guess I want to underscore that they are well down the road of acting on
    this. They don’t really know all the pieces. And I think that’s going to be
    crucial for how we think about the trade agenda evolving.


    So take, for example, the European Green Deal. It’s a huge infrastructure
    investment, including big bets on new industries like hydrogen as a
    potential strategy for cutting emissions; all very encouraging, but they’ve
    got to build up these industries. And I think that’s where the trade and
    investment agenda is going to come in, because they want to advance various
    industries. They have their own version of our infrastructure bills and
    they’re going to be pushing them along with procurement and so on. And
    that’s where the messy concerns about trade and investment effects will
    arise as to what’s legitimate, what’s not legitimate.


    There’s no question, exactly as Warren said, that the trade law and trade
    arrangements make this quite – it’s – one can imagine strategies that are
    completely compatible with the trade regime. But then, in a world of low
    trust, you look at a government procurement program that’s designed to
    advance low-carbon steel, and are we seeing something that’s distortionary
    or not distortionary? And that’s – those are the kinds of stresses that I
    think are going to come into the trade regime.


    I guess one other thing about Europe that I think is important for us to
    keep in mind is there’s talk this summer about developing and implementing
    a border-adjustment regime originating in Europe. Already they’ve been
    using threats very effectively. They’ve – one European diplomat called it
    negotiating with a loaded gun on the table. I mean, you know, they’ve got
    to watch out for the “Pulp Fiction” moment where the gun goes off and
    you’ve got a cleanup problem. But that strategy has really motivated a lot
    of action.


    Look at what’s happening in airlines on emission reductions. There’s no way
    the global airline and equipment manufacturers would be doing what they’re
    at least trying to do on emission reductions without that threat of loss of
    access to the European market there. So they know that the threats already,
    quite apart from implementation, have had a big impact. And that’s a big
    part of their playbook.


    Mr. Reinsch: I think that’s – I think they’ve discovered the first-mover
    advantage when it comes to regulation in a host of areas. We’ve got other
    papers on digital trade where we’ve noticed the same thing.


    Either of the other two want to add anything? Warren –


    Rep. Blumenauer: I have found their materials really very helpful. We’ve
    had some great conversations with them. I think we ought to run to catch
    up. They are moving forward. I think they can help incent some things here.
    I don’t find that a problem. I think it might help call the question here
    where the people are not going to be able to continue dragging their feet.


    There will be some dislocation, to say the very least. But I’ve found, in
    initial conversations with them, there is a keen interest in making sure
    that the United States is a partner here, not being on the sideline, not
    doing stupid things to them. And I think they are finding the reaction to
    the Biden administration refreshing, working with people like Secretary
    Kerry, with Ambassador Tai. I think there’s room here for us to make some
    progress fairly rapidly.


    Mr. Reinsch: Warren?


    Mr. Maruyama: Yeah. Well, I think I would agree very much with the
    congressman. The ideal solution here would be if movements toward a carbon
    regime could be harmonized between some of the major actors, because if it
    isn’t and the EU is the first mover and goes ahead with a border tax, we’re
    going to find taxes being imposed on U.S. goods and services. And the
    airlines episode a couple of years ago, I think, would be just the sort of
    opening salvo in all of that.


    But you’re going to have other countries that are going to be vulnerable to
    EU border measures or border taxes as well – the Chinese, the Indians, any
    country that doesn’t have a climate regime. So unless it can be sort of
    synchronized, as the congressman said, you’ve got a prescription for trade
    conflict.


Mr. Reinsch: 
    And where is the – oh, David, go ahead.


    Mr. Victor: Can I just comment? As an analyst, I agree completely with
    what’s just been said. (Laughs.)


    And then as a political scientist – well, I guess this is a version of
    analysis – I’m very concerned that there’s no scenario in the real world
    whereby things are really synchronized because the Europeans are going to
    remain way out in front of us. And then – and you look at that, at the
    carbon – actual carbon prices – the difference between, you know, the
    California price and the European Emissions Trading Scheme price, where the
    prices are going up – and then you look beyond prices at what’s really
    doing the work almost everywhere in the world – which is not markets; it’s
    regulation and industrial policy – the effective difference in the cost of
    effort is huge. And so the Europeans had this kind of moment of clarity of
    seeing that even as they imagine what the Biden administration could do as
    they come into – come into office, that there’s still going to be a big
    disconnect between what’s going on in Europe and what’s going on here. And
    maybe that’s just going to be tolerated, but I’m just worried that
    politically that can’t be tolerated. The bigger the differences get, the
    more the Europeans lead.


Mr. Reinsch: 
    Well, that’s where I was going. Let me ask one more question, then I’m
    going to turn it over to Sarah to run the show for a while.


    Where is the venue for resolving the issues that the three of you have just
    been talking about? You know, we can have a bilateral discussion with the
    EU fine, but what does that say about China, about India, about developing
    economies? Do we do this in COP? Do we do this as – sort of as an
    environmental exercise? Do we do it in the WTO? Do we do it somewhere else
    in the U.N.? What’s the – what’s the appropriate venue for trying to
    produce what is essentially a solution to a global problem?


Mr. Victor: 
    I can take something off the table, which is the COP. (Laughs.)


    Mr. Reinsch: (Laughs.) OK.


    Mr. Victor: The Conference of the Parties, just to get the language right.
    The Conference of the Parties is a global consensus-oriented organization.
    They couldn’t agree that today is Friday. So we can’t expect these issues
    to be resolved except with kind of pablum statements about avoiding
    conflict and stuff like that.


    I think this is an area where the – where the climate world has a lot to
    learn from the trade world, where these hard things are worked out at least
    initially in smaller groups, very careful attention to exactly what the
    impacts are on trade measures. The whole tariffication discussion for
    decades in trade is relevant here in climate because of the need to convert
    industrial policy and regulatory measures into, in effect, price
    equivalents. And so there’s all this work that the trade world has done
    that the climate world, frankly, hasn’t even begun to approach. And so I
    think it’s going to be done in these smaller groups that are more trade-
    and investment-oriented than climate-oriented.


Mr. Reinsch: 
    Let’s keep in mind, you know, in New Zealand it’s not Friday, so maybe even
    reaching agreement on the day is not that easy.


    I’m sorry, go ahead. Who’s going to talk? Warren?


    Mr. Maruyama: This is Warren. I’m glad to see David say such nice things
    about the trade world, but I think it’s the trade world of 25 years ago
    because we’ve become just as dysfunctional as a lot of other international
    organizations. And the – you know, I was there in July of 2008 when the
    Doha Round basically crashed, and at this point I think the WTO would have
    similar problems reaching agreement on just about anything – and
    particularly something as contentious as border measures.


    Mr. Reinsch: OK.


    Sarah, I turn it over to you.


    Sarah Ladislaw: Great. Well, thank you. This has been a fascinating
    conversation so far. I’m always glad when trade people let me into their
    world because there’s a lot of interesting intersections here.


    I wanted to pick up on something, though, which is – and maybe kind of
    throw a premise out on the table, which is not that there’s a conflict
    inherently in environmental goods and trade-oriented goods or outcomes, but
    instead that the trade world and the climate world are suffering from the
    same issue, which is a drive towards more protectionist measures, right, a
    drive towards being able to unearth more ambitious climate policy by virtue
    of yielding more domestic political benefits and economic benefits, which
    is leading a lot of the most ambitious climate policies we’re seeing today
    to be both focused on greenhouse gas emissions reduction but also making
    sure that domestic manufacturing and jobs and things like that are the
    result of this climate policy.


    And so, in my mind, that exacerbates some of the potential for trade
    conflict that we’ve been talking about. And I have some real questions, but
    how that – those conflicts may manifest themselves. Similar to the question
    that Bill just asked about what would be the venue for resolving them, I’m
    kind of interested in where they might come from. So we’ve talked a little
    bit about CBAM and Europe and the United States, but what about something
    like supply-chain reviews, right? What about this big push that the
    administration has just launched on trying to think about supply chains
    and, you know, how to create resilient supply chains in some industries
    that are going to be critically important for the energy sector? Do any of
    you see this sort of focus on supply chains or industrial policy as being
    an area where climate and energy – excuse me – climate and trade could
    experience more conflicts? Happy to go to whoever’d like to answer that.


    David.


    Mr. Victor: Well, I’m also interested in what the others say. But I think
    yes. I don’t know if it’s going to be this particular executive order on –
    simply because it’s more of a study order. It’s just go find out and tell
    me in 100 days. But they’ll do that. If it comes back similar to the way
    the Trump administration’s executive order was on interconnected devices to
    the grid, for example, where that was read by some firms as being highly,
    highly restrictive to imported products, in particular Chinese products,
    that had, you know, any kind of electronic equipment in them – which I
    think is everything these days – then we’re going to see, you know, more –
    it’ll look to some people like drive-by trade disputes, but it’ll be, I
    think, the same thing over again.


    And I really appreciate Warren’s comment trade of 25 years ago. It might be
    that the people who did trade and climate 25 years ago should actually get
    back together and work out what – kind of dispute by dispute or problem or
    problem would be some remedies for tamping things down. And I think the
    will to do that is there on the bilateral side – EU-U.S. It’s there on the
    U.S.-China side, driven partly by concern about what the Europeans are
    going to do. More loaded guns are sitting no more tables bouncing around.
    And so it’s there, but it’s very hard to get a lot of traction on that
    given all the other stuff that’s broiling in politics these days.


    Rep. Blumenauer: Therein I think is an opportunity. I mean, there are so
    many – (background noise) – Big Ben in the background here. I apologize.


    Ms. Ladislaw: It’s very nice.


    Rep. Blumenauer: Kind of get the flavor of international context. There are
    so many elements that are at work here where there is a common interest in
    going forward. I mean, ultimately, we have made a commitment to reduce
    carbon. And Chinese, Europeans, they’re moving in different directions, but
    we are a part of a common cause. And we understand that this is an ultimate
    existential threat that we face. What we’re going to do with things like
    digital trade, there’s a lot of money on the table in terms of
    international tax regimes.


    I just think that there are enough moving pieces that we can’t – if we get
    down to the specifics – and I really appreciated what you did with the
    report, Bill, talking about, well, let’s launch in as we redefine what
    Trade Promotion Authority will be for trade today – although, candidly,
    we’ve got a number of people who were part of this 20 and 25 years ago who
    are part of it now. And I think they’re in a position to help us sort this
    through. People understand that we are in fact running out of time. There
    is an urgency. Markets are moving. We can’t stop the innovation. We
    wouldn’t want to. There’s a vulnerability dealing with supply chains, with
    rare earth minerals, and so forth.


    We’re either going to reach an accord or we’re going to move forward with
    alternatives, but I don’t think the status quo is something that will hold,
    and people screwing around for the next 20 years on the next failed round
    of international trade. I mean, what we’re going to do with agricultural
    issues. I mean, this is another critical area dealing with climate
    emissions. And there are, in fact, solutions that will help productivity,
    will help farmers in America and in other countries around the world.
    Having a low-carbon agriculture future actually is more productive and is
    an essential part of whether we’re going to solve the climate conundrum.


    And I just think that there are people that are willing to step forward and
    be dealing with some of these larger issues. Now, I may be naïve. I know a
    number of you have scars that I don’t have in terms of being in the
    trenches with the knives out. But I think we’ve never seen an array of
    circumstances that are like we’ve seen now. And events are moving forward
    and are not going to wait for cumbersome reset with the WTO or other
    mechanisms.


    Ms. Ladislaw: Very well said. Warren.


Mr. Maruyama: 
    You know, I don’t see an inherent conflict between supply chains and our,
    you know, trade obligations. Certainly a supply-chain resiliency program
    could go in a protectionist direction but, you know, President Biden’s
    executive order on buy America was fully consistent with our government
    procurement agreement and free trade agreements. You know, a lot of the
    supply chain issue was about China, which is its own separate set of
    issues. And it’s not necessarily about protectionism at all.


    You know, if I could just take this in a slightly different direction, I
    think the real problem for climate is – and for border measures – is not
    really protectionism or anything like that. It’s whether it’s possible in
    this country to reach a domestic consensus on what sort of climate regime
    we want. And, you know, Bill and I first met too long ago but, you know, it
    was in the 1980s when the World War II generation was running the Congress.
    And, you know, you had people who could come together across the aisle to
    reach agreements on tough issues. And we seem to have lost that. If you do
    reach a consensus on a – to do something on climate change, there are ways
    of structuring border measures that are fully WTO consistently and
    basically make the trade problem go away.


    Ms. Ladislaw: It’s a great point. And I want to, you know, focus on the
    fact that we’ve brought up China a number of times in this last, you know,
    series of responses. One of the things that I’m curious about is what you
    think the engagement will be like, needs to be like, in the context of
    dealing with China. You know, we spend a lot of time thinking about that in
    the climate world. You spend a lot of time thinking about that in the trade
    world.


    One of the – you know, the energy program at CSIS just recently put out a
    report about clean energy supply chains. Echoes much of what was in Bill’s
    report, that the history of trade remedies in the clean energy space
    largely have to do with the fact that China, you know, subsidizes very
    aggressively and protects its own domestic industries in order to grow
    them. And these are the major clean energy industries in the world, right?
    They dominate clean energy supply chains at present.


    And so, you know, it – you can’t help by say to yourself: Well, if all
    countries around the world are now premising a lot of their clean energy
    and climate policies around this idea that they too can be competitive
    clean energy leaders, if they want to look at records of success in that
    space China is the one that has done the best job of that so far. So how
    are we going to engage with China on these issues when so much of our trade
    discussion with them is sort of combatting the state-led capitalism model,
    and so much of our energy discussion and climate discussion is about
    getting on the same page to essentially achieve a lot of what, you know,
    China has been able to achieve?


    David.


    Mr. Victor: Well, I guess some of this is going to be very familiar,
    because it’s going to be like all the other industries where there’s been
    an industrial promotion led by the Chinese, and then we’ve been concerned
    about excess subsidy, and we talk about it, and we work hard in small
    groups on that, and so on. So some of that’s going to be familiar. I think
    the good news is that the team around John Kerry and, more generally, in
    the administration knows all the key players in China very well, from
    Jianhua all the way down. And so it’ll be hard for them to kind of put the
    team back together again just like 2014 all over again in that bilateral
    agreement that had such a big impact on framing what was possible in Paris.


    But I think we know how to work on these problems individually. My bigger
    concern is that you – it’s not just – first of all, it’s not just China.
    You see, for example, batteries – subsidization to the death between Korea
    and China right now, which is now reverberating back inside the executive
    order and other concerns about supply chains for batteries here in the
    United States. And so it’s a more complicated deal to put together. It’s a
    deal that – or, deals. Lots of deals that have been put together under
    conditions of lots of – lots of suspicion. And I’m not sure how easy it’s
    going to be to actually hold them together.


    And then we also need to be really strategic because we can’t put – we can
    put lots of things on the agenda. We have to figure out what part of the
    Chinese relationship we really care about most with regard to climate. And
    right now, I think actually higher on that list is BRI – Belt and Road
    Initiative reform, and the concerns about subsidy of coal and other things
    that, when you just do out the math, have just a much, much bigger impact
    on emissions over the long term. So I would put BRI topics at the top of
    the agenda, at least initially, even at the expense of some of those
    others. But whether that can hold together politically in the United
    States, I don’t know.


    Ms. Ladislaw: Warren or Congressman Blumenauer?


    Rep. Blumenauer: Warren, do you want to?


Ms. Maruyama: 
    Yeah. Well, first of all, a lot of the concerns that we have about China
    and its SOEs and excess capacity and subsidies and industrial policies are,
    I think, widely shared around the world. So that’s one aspect of President
    Biden’s foreign policy and trade policy about working with allies that I
    think has really got some – a high degree of promise.


    You know, if everyone tries to copy China, you know, the Chinese industrial
    policies, as David just said, the one product is they may lead in producing
    some technology but then you end up with a humongous excess-capacity
    problem in things like steel, aluminum, solar panels, optical fiber. So if
    everyone tries to be like China, you know, you have a(n) excess-capacity
    problem in spades.


    And you know, I think, you know, the Biden administration has been talking
    about confronting China on some things and working with them on others, and
    you always see climate and pandemics listed as the things that we can work
    with them on. You know, just – I don’t follow these issues on Chinese
    climate policy, but my understanding has been their economy remains heavily
    coal-dependent. And so I think the idea of talking them into some
    far-reaching climate commitments is something that I’m sort of skeptical
    about, but maybe that’s because I’m a trade person and I’ve been dealing
    with China for a long time.


    Rep. Blumenauer: I don’t know that it’s so much an issue in my mind of
    talking them into something. I mean, the Chinese for 4,000 years have been
    pretty focused on what’s important for China. I know when we were – we had
    a series of meetings over a decade ago where they were lining out and we
    saw what they were doing in wind and solar. I think the key is twofold.


    Number one is that there are countries that share out interests and
    actually, if not American leadership, deeply appreciate our partnership and
    involvement. And it includes Korea and Japan, where there’s an opportunity
    for us to be able to deal with shared interests like supply chains with
    rare-earth minerals. They don’t want to be held hostage any more than we
    do. Part of it is the United States has to make investments. We didn’t make
    investments in terms of where – rare-earth minerals. We haven’t made the
    investment in being able to bring some of the American innovations. What we
    saw in China 10 years ago were American innovations that the Chinese dove
    in, invested, brought to scale in a pretty ruthless but effective fashion.


    We need to have an industrial policy. We need to be investing in our own
    infrastructure. We need to be a little more ruthless in terms of our
    government procurement. I mean, my lord, the – we’re fighting with the Post
    Office now investing two-thirds – in two-thirds-of-a-million of the last
    generation vehicles. We ought to be able to harness that and move forward.
    We can’t be stupid about it. But I think there’s an awareness that this is
    entirely within our capacity. And it is entirely consistent with Joe Biden
    supporting American industry, American jobs, American innovation, and I
    think there’s a lot of interest on the part of the private sector in the
    United States for being more active and engaged.


    But we have to get in the game. We have shortchanged investments in our
    infrastructure, our research and development, and we haven’t followed
    through in terms of protecting our own interests. And I think that’s got to
    stop.


    Ms. Ladislaw: Thank you.


    I know we have lots of questions coming through, and so I want to make sure
    we have time for that so I can turn it back to Bill. But I really did want
    to just ask David one very quick question. You’ve done a lot of work on
    sectoral arrangements and thinking about the value of innovation on a
    sector basis, and I’m just wondering how you think this approach that I
    think is personally quite likely the Kerry team is going to be looking at,
    which is trying to really amplify innovation and deployment of clean-energy
    infrastructure through sectoral arrangements, do you think that that’s
    going to be trade-compliant or potentially a venue for working out some of
    these agreements on how to deal with trade issues?


    Mr. Victor: I think it’s exactly the venue to work out these agreements. I
    think these – these issues. I think these issues are too complex, shrouded
    in risk and theater, to do them generally. They have to work on them sector
    by sector.


    The good thing about this is this is exactly the theory of change the
    British government is advancing as they host COP-26 with the campaigns. And
    there’s all these sectors where if you change facts on the ground, you’re
    going to change the politics. The area where my team at Brookings has been
    doing the most work is around – is around the capital markets. And if, as
    is now starting to happen, as they move more capital and see more risks,
    especially risks associated with the physical impacts of climate change,
    that’s irreversible and that helps solve some of the problems the country
    has right now, which is of credibility. We can plan all we want, but the
    next person who – by executive order can reverse a lot of stuff. But if you
    do – if you implement policies that change facts on the ground in sectors,
    in key markets, that’s much more irreversible. And that’s, I think, the key
    strategic move that we need to make, and fortuitously is also going to make
    it easier to work out some of these difficult trade issues.


    Ms. Ladislaw: Great.


    Bill?


Mr. Reinsch
    : OK. Thank you very much. Good exchange.


    We’ve got a number of audience questions. Let me say a number of them, I
    think, have already been answered by the comments that the panelists have
    already made, so I’m not going to ask them to repeat themselves on some of
    these issues. But there are some other ones that raise a couple of new
    issues.


    The first one is for Congressman Blumenauer. If the administration comes to
    a conclusion of what sort of carbon-adjustment mechanism they would like to
    harmonize with the EU, what is the mechanism for getting it into place? Can
    legislation be passed, in light of the – you know, the narrow majorities on
    both sides and the filibuster? Is Section 232 a better option?


    Rep. Blumenauer: Legislation is going to be a challenge this Congress, make
    no mistake about it. And in part there’s a problem that there’s – these are
    areas, ironically, where there should not be as deep a division in terms of
    partisanship or philosophy. A lot of these things are pretty
    straightforward. But there’s virtually no trust on Capitol Hill right now,
    and it’s hard to describe the chasm that we’re going to be facing.


    David’s point about facts on the ground, what happens with capital markets,
    I mean, I think there are forces at work that are going to be generating
    the momentum for us – that are going to be able to have a broader range of
    people who are not perceived as being narrow political actors but see that
    they have an interest in being able to move this policy forward, that they
    have an interest in terms of a low-carbon future where we’re investing in
    infrastructure, we’re investing in research, that we are standing up for
    American rights not with drive-by tariffs but with a more rational
    approach. I think there’s an opportunity through the mechanisms we have for
    trade this year. We’re moving forward with GSP. We will, ultimately, do
    something with, I think, the administration on a revised Trade Promotion
    Authority that will give a dimension to what we’re talking about.


    And when we get to specifics, I think they’re actually less of a problem,
    and that there are ways to harness forces moving forward. I think it’s – I
    just see these opportunities where people are actually doing things that
    are changing the facts on the ground where the politicians, I think, will
    be more inclined to run to catch up, and that don’t have to be – if we
    start with the partisan divisions, we’re in trouble. If we start with
    trying to adjust to the facts on the ground and bring people together, I
    think we’ll have more progress.


    Mr. Reinsch: OK.


    We’ve got a couple – a number of regional questions and I’m going to
    consolidate them in the interest of time. And they’re about Canada and
    Japan. And the questions are, essentially, what role do you see both of
    those countries playing in this debate, and particularly in advancing our
    trade agenda? And what – how should we relate to Canada and Japan in trying
    to kind of move this issue forward?


Mr. Victor
    : Well, I guess – they’re very different. And this goes –


    Mr. Reinsch: Well, they were separate questions. I’m putting them together.


    Mr. Victor: No, no, no, I appreciate the separate questions. And the – but
    this goes exactly to what the congressman was just saying, which is we’re
    going to have to get good at having a strategy that sometimes builds on the
    strengths of each of the relationships.


    So in the Japanese case, the most important thing, I think, is going to be
    to engage with the industrial parts of the Japanese economy around
    hydrogen, advanced steel, a few other areas where the Japanese really are
    world leaders. And you see it in the patent data and you see it in the
    interest, and also in the industrial promotion.


    In the Canadian case, we’ve got to find a broader engagement with Canada
    because the two economies are so tightly interconnected. And the Canadians
    are going through the same experience right now that we’re going through,
    trying to figure out where they actually have advantage.


    There are a handful of areas, like carbon capture and storage, where I
    think they have skills and we have skills, and we can really scale things
    up. But we’re going to have to work almost on a country-by-country basis or
    region-by-region basis on what are the places where we have something to
    gain from each other and then anchor the facts on the ground around that,
    lest we find the whole effort, you know, generate a lot of trade and
    investment conflicts. And so I think we’re going to have to be very focused
    in that regard.


    Rep. Blumenauer: My thought is dealing – for example, illegal logging.
    We’re able to harness the forces of the market with a minimum of government
    regulation. We’ve seen about a 40 percent reduction in illegal logging in
    an area that has been historically very difficult. We’ve got rogue actors –
    Indonesia, Brazil, the Chinese being bad actors. But by harnessing
    reasonable, thoughtful regulations, actually enforcing them, we’ve been
    able to have a pretty profound impact.


    And I think employing that same sort of tactic going forward, using our
    markets, using common areas of agreement and challenge, like with the
    Canadians, there are, I think, a number of areas where we can make more
    rapid progress item by item, harnessing the market, dealing with
    investment, and having a somewhat lighter touch in terms of regulation, but
    nonetheless meeting our obligations.


    Mr. Reinsch: Warren?


    Mr. Maruyama: Yeah. You know, I think – I doubt – you know, I’m a trade
    person, not a climate person or an environmental person. But, you know, it
    seems to me that Japan and Canada are not really our core problems. And
    again, my understanding is that some of this is the divide between the
    developed countries, which have generally taken steps to bring down carbon,
    and the developing countries, who are rapidly industrializing, and they
    count for a bigger share of emissions and were let out of climate
    obligations under the original Kyoto protocol; India, China being the most
    conspicuous examples.


    But since climate change and CO2 are a global problem in the atmosphere,
    you really do need some sort of a global agreement to bring it down.
    Otherwise, whatever we do in concert with Japan and Canada could get sort
    of blown away by what’s happening in China and India. So I think that’s the
    core negotiating challenge unless something is changed dramatically where
    China and India are now leading on this issue.


    Mr. Reinsch: The further questions that I want to pursue; first,
    Congressman Blumenauer talked a little bit about markets and innovation.
    And we have kind of an interesting question on that. Will overinvestment,
    if there is any, will overinvestment on green and climate technologies lead
    to overvaluation of stocks of renewable-energy equities?


    David, that might be a good one for you.


    Mr. Victor: Well, I mean, I guess, to paraphrase somebody else in a
    different context, it means – it depends on what you mean by the word over.
    But, you know, Tesla – (laughs) – Tesla’s more valuable than all the auto
    industry combined. So is that excess valuation? Is that frothiness, kind of
    GameStop-worthy? I think we don’t know. And that’s the nature of this
    challenge. And so I’m sure there’s going to be overvaluation and
    adjustments and things like that.


    I’m overall less worried about the risk of overinvestment in green
    technology and more concerned that the lack of credibility in a lot of
    governments’ policies will lead to underinvestment. And I think, just to
    what Warren was saying, the world has not changed completely since Kyoto,
    but a lot has changed.


    And one of the striking changes, for example, is the net-zero pledge by the
    Chinese government, net-zero by 2060. And it’s not just kind of one of
    these vacuous pledges that a government makes. It’s actually a pledge that
    now you’re going to see in the five-year plans and all kinds of other
    investments. And maybe they won’t quite be net-zero by 2060; that’s a long
    way off. But there’s a really profound change starting to happen, and the
    change in the investment is most rapid in the places where policy is most
    credible. And so that’s my big concern.


    Rep. Blumenauer: I’m not worried about overinvestment in innovation and
    research and technology. To the contrary, I think that there’s a lot of
    running room. Part of what I hope is that the federal government itself
    does a better job of harnessing its own tools and resources. We could spend
    the rest of the hour talking about the Department of Defense, the largest
    consumer of energy in the world, and what can happen there if we redirect
    those resources in a way that is sustainable and compatible with both our
    economy and our strategic interests. The agriculture sector is huge, and
    there’s tremendous opportunities to be able to make it more productive
    while we significantly reduce carbon emissions.


    I think that there are opportunities to be able to redirect this in a way
    that we can accelerate that production. Our friend Hal Harvey suggests that
    we spend less on energy research than on potato chips. I mean, this is
    something that is long overdue and will have a tremendous return on
    investment, I think.


    Mr. Reinsch: Well, let’s move to more of a political and economic question.
    Would the U.S. consider implementing an economy-wide price on carbon? Is
    there an appetite in Congress for that? And I guess, related, is that a
    necessary element of making progress on all the other things that we’ve
    been talking about?


    Rep. Blumenauer: Not at this time. It’s not something that’s going to
    happen. We’re going to be dealing with regulation. We’re going to be
    dealing with incentives. We’re going to be dealing with partnerships with
    other countries, with industries. This is going to be – I think ultimately
    we will have a price on carbon. But we’re going to have to deal with the
    things we’re talking about here today in terms of innovation, trade
    agreements and what not, before we get to carbon pricing. Sadly, it’s not
    possible, given the political climate that we have, for the next few years.


    Mr. Maruyama: You know, if we can’t reach a domestic political consensus
    through the Congress on a carbon regime, our trade problems escalate
    dramatically, because, you know, from a trade perspective, the simplest way
    to do this would be a carbon tax, just because under the existing WTO rules
    – so you don’t have to negotiate in the COP, you don’t have to negotiate in
    the WTO – you can do border adjustments. You can impose an additional fee
    on imports and you can rebate the tax on your exports. So it’s neutral and
    a level playing field.


    But all of that is tied to whether we have a domestic regime, so we’re
    treating imports, exports, and our domestic products the same. So if you
    don’t have a domestic regime and we go out and try and put restrictions on
    imports or we try and subsidize our exports, then we’ve got major WTO
    problems.


    Mr. Victor: I agree with what Warren has said. (Laughs.) The ideal strategy
    is a carbon tax and it makes the trade problem easier. I think, shockingly,
    the politics won’t line up with what the trade lawyers need. And I think,
    therefore, what Congressman Blumenauer said is correct, which is – and let
    me put it more sharply – I think the visions right now of an economy-wide
    carbon tax that’s at a level high enough to be meaningful are the world of
    magical thinking. And I prefer the world of real thinking, and it’s going
    to be a world of regulation and industrial policy and infrastructure and on
    and on and on. It’s going to be messy. It’s going to raise the odds of
    trade and investment conflicts. But it’s the real world. And we ought to
    focus on the real world rather than some imaginary world.


    Mr. Reinsch: OK, let me ask one more question, and then I’ll give each of
    you a chance for a final word or two. Earlier in the session we talked
    about China. And one of the questions that came up, which was an
    interesting one, is we’ve got a whole spectrum of issues with China. There
    are a bunch of trade issues that are not environment-related. There are
    environment issues. There are human-rights issues. There are also
    national-security issues, as all of you well know.


    How do – how do you expect the Biden administration to balance and
    prioritize those things? Do you see the climate issue being at the top of
    the president’s list when he engages with Xi Jinping, or do you think it’s
    going to be farther down – farther down the list?


    Mr. Victor: It’ll be high on the list. I don’t know if it’ll always be on
    top because, as you know, when heads of state engage with each other events
    put things at the top of the list. And also human rights is going to be a
    big deal. But climate is going to be way up there. This administration has
    put climate at the center of the campaign. From the primary to the general,
    and in the people that have been appointed early on, and the people who
    continue to be appointed, and the quality of those people. So it’s
    extraordinary. And it will be right up there. And in the Chinese case,
    we’ll keep it up there. And there are going to be other governments where
    we probably won’t keep it up there, because there are other things that
    dominate, like the U.S.-Mexico relationship. But for China, it’s got to be
    there.


    Mr. Reinsch: Anybody else?


    Rep. Blumenauer: I’m convinced that there is going to be high on the agenda
    of this administration and, frankly, with the American people. I am
    impressed with how much infrastructure is in place right now with
    nongovernmental organizations, with the discussions that have taken place
    with the Chinese government at the highest levels.


    There’s Big Ben again. I apologize.


    There’s some degree of awareness and interaction and common interest. I
    think we will separate them. We will deal with human rights. We’re going to
    look the other way given gross abuses with the Uighurs. We’re going to
    stand up for our own interests in terms of what abuses Chinese have taken
    in sort of traditional trade venues.


    I think we cannot isolate these things. There are a number of them that we
    need to work on in terms of commercial opportunities, in terms of human
    rights, in terms of technology. And I think we continue to work on them,
    and I think the Biden administration will do that. They have a wide range
    of things that they’re concerned with. They’ve got a team that is
    knowledgeable. And there are lots of connections with people who are
    committed to a low-carbon future. And I just think they will – we will – we
    will actually be benefitted by being able to have discrete actions in a
    number of areas where we share interests with other allies. So it’s not us
    alone, but we’re mobilizing other forces, other voices, other innovation to
    try and keep up a steady pressure.


    But we cannot do this on a hit and miss basis. We can’t be incoherent, as
    the Trump administration was. Patience has not been our virtue, and we’ve
    been reluctant to make long-term investments, which I think is ill-advised.
    And I think the Biden administration will have a more comprehensive
    approach. And I think they will measure some success.


    Mr. Reinsch: Thank you for that. That’s a good concluding overview. Warren,
    do you want to make a final comment, and then I’ll go to David and Sarah?


    Mr. Maruyama: Just that, you know, dealing with China is always
    challenging. I don’t pretend to be a Biden insider, although I voted for
    him. And you know, I think it’s pretty clear that climate will be at the
    top of the agenda. You know, one of the reasons why people like the
    president, the vice president, and Katherine Tai get paid the big bucks is
    they got to sort out U.S. priorities and structure them as to achieve them.
    So hopefully that can happen. I think one of the other things that was
    heartening about the president is he talked about being a unifier and
    working on a bipartisan basis with the Congress. And I really do think that
    at the end of the day, whether we could get to some sort of domestic
    consensus on climate is key to all the trade issues, and probably on
    climate itself. And to my endangered birds. So thank you very much.


    Mr. Reinsch: (Laughs.) David, final word?


    Mr. Victor: Well, I just want to say Warren’s birds have played a really
    important role in climate science because it’s one of the early
    incontrovertible pieces of evidence that the climate was changing, that the
    migratory patterns were changing by weeks. So thank you to your birds,
    Warren.


    The – I think the good news in all this is that the reason we’re focusing
    on what in a granular way industrial policy and infrastructure policy, and
    so on, means for trade conflicts is that we’re getting serious about the
    problem. So that’s good and encouraging. I do think the administration is
    very mobilized and focused on this issue. But I think what the congressman
    said early on about legislation’s essentially off the table is really
    important. We’re going to have to double down our effort to identify things
    that we can offer to other countries to make progress on climate that other
    countries actually believe. And I think we have not really done that
    seriously yet. Early days of the administration. But the amount of
    skepticism I’m hearing around the world about whether what we do is
    credible is very high right now.


    Mr. Reinsch: Sarah, any final words?


    Ms. Ladislaw: Yeah. Thanks very much for this discussion. I think it was
    really great. You know, just to put a finer point on things, I think both
    the trade and the climate worlds will be realms of chaotic policy. And it’s
    chaotic policy that if we’re going to meet the global targets of net zero
    by 2050 and start moving at the rate and pace that is required for that, it
    could be very fast and very furious between here and there. And so if we
    are getting serious, I think that there’s just a lot of potential for
    unintended consequences, though very necessary in order to do what we need
    to do on the climate. So that’s why we’re spending so much time hanging out
    with Bill and his colleagues. And that’s why we’re doing this across CSIS
    as a broad initiative, to make sure that climate is embedded in all areas
    of foreign policy. So very happy to be part of the discussion today.
    Thanks, Bill.


    Mr. Reinsch: And that’s why we have additional work planned going forward,
    which we will let all of you know about as it emerges. And to the audience,
    which there were more than 300, thank you very much for joining. It’s
    appreciated. We couldn’t answer all the questions. There were one or two
    that were highly technical of a legal nature, which I’m going to dump on
    Warren and for him to answer or not as he wishes. And for the rest of you,
    we’ll hope to find another opportunity to do that.


    So with that, thank you very much. Thank you to the congressman. Thank you
    to the panelists for some very insightful comments. And so, with that,
    goodbye.
 

 
Downloads
 Download Transcript 

Media Queries
 Contact H. Andrew Schwartz Chief Communications Officer Tel: 202.775.3242
 Contact Caleb Diamond Media Relations Manager and Editorial Associate Tel: 202.775.3173

  




  Footer menu 
Topics
Regions
Programs
Experts
Events
Analysis
Web Projects
Podcasts
iDeas Lab
Transcripts
About Us
Support Us

 
  Contact CSIS Email CSIS
Tel: 202.887.0200
Fax: 202.775.3199
 Visit CSIS Headquarters 1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
 Media Queries Contact H. Andrew Schwartz Chief Communications Officer Tel: 202.775.3242
 Contact Caleb Diamond Media Relations Manager and Editorial Associate Tel: 202.775.3173

 
  Daily Updates Sign up to receive The Evening, a daily brief on the news, events, and people shaping the world of international affairs.Subscribe to CSIS Newsletters  Follow CSIS 
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
YouTube
Instagram


 

All content © 2021. All rights reserved.
Legal menu 
Credits
Privacy Policy
Reprint Permissions




 

