






First meeting of the G20 Sustainable Finance Study Group (SFSG) | G20
































Go directly to the content
Go directly to the footer














































































































































































































































































































































































































This website uses technical, analytics and third-party cookies.By continuing to browse, you agree the use of cookies.

Privacy policy
Accept









Follow us




Facebook - external website, will open to a new tab







Instagram - external website, will open to a new tab







Twitter - external website, will open to a new tab












Italiano / English 


























Menu






close




About the G20



Italian G20 Presidency







Priorities
Events Calendar
Ministerial Meetings
Working Groups
Engagement groups
Documents
Logo





Rome Summit



Media







News
Photos and videos




 














Home/
Media/
News/
First meeting of the G20 Sustainable Finance Study Group (SFSG)







First meeting of the G20 Sustainable Finance Study Group (SFSG)
The Study Group kicked off a discussion on the development of a multi-year G20 Roadmap for Sustainable Finance.  




Facebook - will open to a new tabExternal website, 







Twitter - will open to a new tabExternal website, 







Whatsapp - will open to a new tabExternal website, 







Telegram - external website, will open to a new tab






March 27th, 2021

 
Tackling climate change and the other challenges needed to bring economic development on a sustainable path requires the involvement of the financial system and its alignment with the objectives of the Agenda 2030 and the Paris Agreement. In line with its vision articulated in the pillars of People, Planet and Prosperity, the Italian presidency of the G20 has decided to restart the work of the Sustainable Finance Study Group (SFSG) within the Finance track.
The first meeting of the SFSG was held virtually on 26 March 2021.  The Study Group’s two co-chairs are China and the United States, with support from the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) as secretariat. 
The Study Group commenced discussion on the development of a multi-year G20 Roadmap for Sustainable Finance. The roadmap is designed to present an overview of the major gaps and barriers in mobilizing sustainable finance, and to outline key actions and milestones for the consideration of G20 Members.
By the end of the Italian Presidency, the SFSG will produce a synthesis report on the progress made on the main deliverables for 2021: sustainability reporting, approaches to identify sustainable investments (“taxonomies”), and the role of international financial institutions in supporting the Paris Agreement.  
All of these topics will be addressed also through high level events such as the G20 Sustainable Finance Private Sector Roundtable (May) and the G20 Venice Conference on Climate (July).























Useful links
Transparent Administration
Privacy Policy
Legal Notes
Accessibility Statement






Scroll to top





















