













New OECD report to support G7 efforts to better manage future economic shocks - G7 UK Presidency 2021

















































The G7 UK website uses cookies to make the site work better for you. Some of these cookies are essential to how the site functions and others are optional. Optional cookies help us remember your settings, measure your use of the site and personalise how we communicate with you. Any data collected is anonymised and we do not set optional cookies unless you consent.


Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies


						Set cookie preferences
					






					You've accepted all cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.
				
Hide Cookie Message



					You've rejected all optional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.
				
Hide Cookie Message



Skip to content








G7 UK Presidency 2021








What is the G7?
Policy Priorities
Members & Guests
The Cornwall Summit
Meetings & Groups
News & Media











Back to  News & MediaNew OECD report to support G7 efforts to better manage future economic shocks 





Published 23 March 2021 


Share


Twitter sharing link
LinkedIn sharing link
Facebook sharing link






Categories:News Articles





Report commissioned by the G7 Economic Resilience Panel on how global economies can better prepare for, respond to and recover from economic shocksFocus on the benefits of open interconnected markets, how best to improve supply chain resilience, and harness technological innovationRecognises role of G7 in learning from the pandemic and galvanising action to protect the global economy
The Prime Minister’s G7 Envoy for Economic Resilience, Lord Sedwill, has welcomed a new report by the OECD published today (23 March 2021), to support the UK’s Presidency of the G7 and its efforts to agree new measures to protect the global economy from future shocks. 
The report was presented to the G7 Economic Resilience Panel chaired by Lord Sedwill earlier this month. In particular it suggests governments can learn from the international supply issues during the pandemic, by considering a stress test for systemically important supply chains, just as the world put in place for banks after 2008 to ensure international financial stability and confidence in global markets. It also considers how new multilateral mechanisms can be used to ensure a stable global market for raw minerals critical to the net-zero transition and future digital economy. 
The report, titled Fostering economic resilience in a world of open and integrated markets: Risks, vulnerabilities and areas for policy action was commissioned by the Panel to inform its work on how the G7 can work together to make global markets more resilient, effective, diverse and sustainable. This work is a vital part of how our economies can build back better from the coronavirus pandemic, and anticipate future global economic crises.
The wide-ranging recommendations of the report will be considered in detail by the G7 Panel on Economic Resilience, before the Panel submits its own recommendations to G7 Leaders at their June Summit in Cornwall. Key areas of focus for the Panel will be strengthening diverse and interdependent global supply chains, international standards and regulation, and adapting modern markets in response to technological innovation. 
Lord Sedwill, Chair of the G7 Economic Resilience Panel said:
The unprecedented impact of the covid pandemic on the global economy has highlighted issues of resilience, arising from the growth of monopolies, geopolitical trade tensions, global economic governance falling behind innovation and technology, and the supply of the critical elements essential to the future economy. In response, we should renew our common purpose and commitment to open, well-regulated global markets which promote the green transition, inclusive growth and economic resilience as we build back better. On behalf of the Panel, I want to thank the Secretary General and his team at the OECD for their work on this report. I look forward to working with my fellow panelists on addressing these shared challenges, and to putting a concrete set of initiatives to G7 leaders in June.
Angel Gurría, Secretary General of the OECD said:
As we have seen in the past decade alone, in today’s interconnected world, shock events can quickly cascade across borders and economic sectors, and have devastating effects on people’s lives, jobs and opportunities, and on their trust in governments, institutions and markets.Building economic resilience in the face of future shocks is a global challenge for the post-COVID world. For global markets and supply chains to serve as a source of resilience, governments and the public need to have the confidence that markets are and will remain open and fair, including during times of stress.
ENDS
Notes to Editors
The full report is available via the OECD here.
Full membership of the Panel and an overview of its work is available here.








31/03/2021 



News Articles 





G7 Trade Ministers’ Meeting – Chair’s Statement
Chair's statement by the G7 countries at the inaugural G7 Trade Track.






23/03/2021 



News Articles 





Government plans to invest up to £7.8 million in Cornwall Airport Newquay to support G7 Summit and legacy
The Government has announced a new planned investment of up to £7.8 million to improve Cornwall Airport Newquay’s facilities ahead of June’s G7 Summit. 













Media Contact
g7media@cabinetoffice.gov.uk
020 7276 9797
Public Correspondence
G7correspondence@cabinetoffice.gov.uk
Please check back regularly for further information and news about the UK’s G7 Presidency.



Follow Us




Credits
Designed & Built in Cornwall



 




Cookie Policy
Accessibility
Privacy Policy


Image Credits: Number 10, DIT, Adam Gibbard, Liwesta, Tom Fisk, BBC, National Maritime Museum Cornwall, Eden Project, Carbis Bay Estate


 











