













Chancellor and G7 Finance Ministers agree milestone support for vulnerable countries - G7 UK Presidency 2021

















































The G7 UK website uses cookies to make the site work better for you. Some of these cookies are essential to how the site functions and others are optional. Optional cookies help us remember your settings, measure your use of the site and personalise how we communicate with you. Any data collected is anonymised and we do not set optional cookies unless you consent.


Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies


						Set cookie preferences
					






					You've accepted all cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.
				
Hide Cookie Message



					You've rejected all optional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.
				
Hide Cookie Message



Skip to content








G7 UK Presidency 2021








What is the G7?
Policy Priorities
Members & Guests
The Cornwall Summit
Meetings & Groups
News & Media











Back to  News & MediaChancellor and G7 Finance Ministers agree milestone support for vulnerable countries 





Published 19 March 2021 


Share


Twitter sharing link
LinkedIn sharing link
Facebook sharing link






Categories:News Articles





Chancellor Rishi Sunak and his G7 counterparts today agreed to back proposals for vulnerable countries to receive further financial support during the global pandemic.
G7 Finance Ministers agreed to support a new and sizeable allocation of IMF Special Drawing Rights (SDR)– an asset issued by the IMF to boost members’ reserves and provide liquidity for vulnerable countries, freeing up resources to pay for crucial needs such as vaccines and food imports, and improve the buffers of emerging markets and low-income countries.
This significant step lays the groundwork for potential sign-off at the G20 and IMFC meetings taking place during the upcoming IMF-World Bank Spring Meetings in April. The last allocation of SDRs was in the wake of the financial crisis in 2009.
Speaking following the second G7 Finance Ministers meeting of the UK’s Presidency (Friday 19 March), Chancellor of the Exchequer Rishi Sunak said:
Today’s milestone agreement among the G7 paves the way for crucial and concerted action to support the world’s low-income countries, ensuring that no country is left behind in the global economic recovery from coronavirus.
As part of the SDR discussions, it was agreed that the G7 would work with the IMF to make progress on enhancing transparency and accountability around the usage of SDRs and explore how countries could voluntarily recycle their SDR holdings to further support low-income countries. The G7 agreed that the IMF should separately work up some options for how this might be done, without delaying agreement to a new general allocation.
Chairing the meeting, Chancellor Rishi Sunak also welcomed the continued cooperation among G7 Finance Ministers to prioritise climate change and environmental issues in their core economic agendas, and noted the continued commitment from G7 counterparts to reach an enduring multilateral solution to the tax challenges of the digital economy, through close cooperation across the G7, G20 and OECD.
Further information
the new allocation is subject to the IMF’s analysis of global reserve needs which will be presented ahead of any formal agreementthere have been four previous allocations of SDRs: in 1970-72; 1979-81; and two in 2009, to make a total of $293 billion allocated to datethe G7 comprises of the United Kingdom, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United States and the EUfurther information about the IMF can be found here








22/03/2021 



News Articles 





UK welcomes South Africa as G7 guest
The Prime Minister has invited the South African President Cyril Ramaphosa to attend the G7 Leaders’ Summit in Cornwall as a guest. 






18/03/2021 



News Articles 





G7 Foreign Ministers’ Statement on Ukraine
G7 Foreign Ministers have issued a statement on Russia’s continued actions to undermine Ukraine’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence.













Media Contact
g7media@cabinetoffice.gov.uk
020 7276 9797
Public Correspondence
G7correspondence@cabinetoffice.gov.uk
Please check back regularly for further information and news about the UK’s G7 Presidency.



Follow Us




Credits
Designed & Built in Cornwall



 




Cookie Policy
Accessibility
Privacy Policy


Image Credits: Number 10, DIT, Adam Gibbard, Liwesta, Tom Fisk, BBC, National Maritime Museum Cornwall, Eden Project, Carbis Bay Estate


 











