













G7 Foreign Ministers' statement on Hong Kong electoral changes - G7 UK Presidency 2021

















































The G7 UK website uses cookies to make the site work better for you. Some of these cookies are essential to how the site functions and others are optional. Optional cookies help us remember your settings, measure your use of the site and personalise how we communicate with you. Any data collected is anonymised and we do not set optional cookies unless you consent.


Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies


						Set cookie preferences
					






					You've accepted all cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.
				
Hide Cookie Message



					You've rejected all optional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.
				
Hide Cookie Message



Skip to content








G7 UK Presidency 2021








What is the G7?
Policy Priorities
Members & Guests
The Cornwall Summit
Meetings & Groups
News & Media











Back to  News & MediaG7 Foreign Ministers’ statement on Hong Kong electoral changes 





Published 12 March 2021 


Share


Twitter sharing link
LinkedIn sharing link
Facebook sharing link






Categories:News Articles





G7 Foreign Ministers have issued the following statement on China's decision to erode democratic elements of the electoral system in Hong Kong:
"We, the G7 Foreign Ministers of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States of America and the High Representative of the European Union, are united in expressing our grave concerns at the Chinese authorities’ decision fundamentally to erode democratic elements of the electoral system in Hong Kong. Such a decision strongly indicates that the authorities in mainland China are determined to eliminate dissenting voices and opinions in Hong Kong.
The package of changes approved by the National People’s Congress, combined with mass arrests of pro-democracy activists and politicians, undermines Hong Kong’s high degree of autonomy under the “One Country, Two Systems” principle. The package will also stifle political pluralism, contrary to the aim of moving towards universal suffrage as set out in the Basic Law. Furthermore, the changes will reduce freedom of speech which is a right guaranteed in the Sino-British Joint Declaration.
The people of Hong Kong should be trusted to cast their votes in the best interests of Hong Kong. Discussion of differing views, not silencing of them, is the way to secure the stability and prosperity of Hong Kong.
We call on China to act in accordance with the Sino-British Joint Declaration and its other legal obligations and respect fundamental rights and freedoms in Hong Kong, as provided for in the Basic Law. We also call on China and the Hong Kong authorities to restore confidence in Hong Kong’s political institutions and end the unwarranted oppression of those who promote democratic values and the defence of rights and freedoms."








15/03/2021 



News Articles 





Cornish furniture makers to design tables for G7 Summit
The Government has enlisted the help of local Cornish furniture makers and designers to produce the meeting tables that will be used by leaders at the G7 Summit in Carbis Bay, showcasing the region’s design work on the world stage. 






08/03/2021 



News Articles 





Government launches G7 Gender Equality Advisory Council
The government has today announced the creation of a new advisory council – led by Liz Truss at ministerial level – to lead the UK’s gender equality work at the G7.













Media Contact
g7media@cabinetoffice.gov.uk
020 7276 9797
Public Correspondence
G7correspondence@cabinetoffice.gov.uk
Please check back regularly for further information and news about the UK’s G7 Presidency.



Follow Us




Credits
Designed & Built in Cornwall



 




Cookie Policy
Accessibility
Privacy Policy


Image Credits: Number 10, DIT, Adam Gibbard, Liwesta, Tom Fisk, BBC, National Maritime Museum Cornwall, Eden Project, Carbis Bay Estate


 











