













Government launches G7 Gender Equality Advisory Council - G7 UK Presidency 2021

















































The G7 UK website uses cookies to make the site work better for you. Some of these cookies are essential to how the site functions and others are optional. Optional cookies help us remember your settings, measure your use of the site and personalise how we communicate with you. Any data collected is anonymised and we do not set optional cookies unless you consent.


Accept all cookies
Reject optional cookies


						Set cookie preferences
					






					You've accepted all cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.
				
Hide Cookie Message



					You've rejected all optional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.
				
Hide Cookie Message



Skip to content








G7 UK Presidency 2021








What is the G7?
Policy Priorities
Members & Guests
The Cornwall Summit
Meetings & Groups
News & Media











Back to  News & MediaGovernment launches G7 Gender Equality Advisory Council 





Published 8 March 2021 


Share


Twitter sharing link
LinkedIn sharing link
Facebook sharing link






Categories:News Articles





Liz Truss appointed Ministerial lead, with Sarah Sands as ChairCouncil will make recommendations to the G7 on policy to drive women’s empowerment, with a particular focus on science and technologyMembers will include Prof Sarah Gilbert – who led work on the AZ/Oxford vaccine – and other high-profile women from the world of tech, science and engineering
The government has today announced the creation of a new advisory council – led by Liz Truss at ministerial level – to lead the UK’s gender equality work at the G7.
The Gender Equality Advisory Council will produce recommendations to drive women’s empowerment across the world to ensure women are at the heart of the build back better agenda as we recover from COVID-19.
Distinguished journalist and author, Sarah Sands, has been appointed as the Chair of the GEAC, with further members set to be announced in the coming weeks. Sands’ career has showcased an ability to drive forward the UK’s news agenda and hold politicians to account, both of which will support the work of the Council.
The Prime Minister has asked Truss to lead the work of the Council at ministerial level, which he sees as a crucial part of the UK’s broader work as G7 president this year. With the role of women in science, tech and engineering amplified by the UK’s vaccine development and rollout, Ministers will also use the G7 to encourage more women and girls to take up STEM based careers or education opportunities.
Building on the foundations laid by the Canadian and French G7 presidencies, the GEAC will champion the core principles of freedom, opportunity, individual humanity and dignity for women and girls around the world. They will produce an independent report and set out recommendations as to how the G7 should work together so that women across the globe drive and benefit from the pandemic recovery.
Chair of the Gender Equality Advisory Council, Sarah Sands, said:
The G7 is an opportunity to tear down the hurdles that hold women back.Across the world we share common objectives: protection from violence, the liberating force of education and economic empowerment.I am honoured to chair the GEAC council and delighted that women are placed at the centre of the UK's global vision.
Against the backdrop of recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, the 2021 GEAC will focus on supporting action on education, economic empowerment and ending violence against women. This will build on the government’s commitment to build back better, ensuring everyone has the opportunity to succeed.
The UK is determined that gender equality is viewed as vitally important throughout this year’s presidency, which is why GEAC members will report to G7 Leaders, whilst being invited to support each G7 ministerial group in integrating gender equality across all of their actions.    
On International Women’s Day, the UK will unite to recognise the role of women in combating the pandemic, whether that is on the front line in healthcare and retail roles, providing unpaid care work or playing a crucial part in developing vaccines. The GEAC will build on this, putting gender equality at the heart of the recovery effort across the world.
Further Information:
Council members will be selected based on the wide-ranging experiences and perspectives on gender equality they can bring to the G7 Summit themes: COVID-19 response and recovery, prosperity and trade, climate and environment, and global values. The GEAC will include members from each G7 country.
Full membership of the Council will be announced in the coming weeks.








12/03/2021 



News Articles 





G7 Foreign Ministers' statement on Hong Kong electoral changes
G7 Foreign Ministers have issued the following statement on China's decision to erode democratic elements of the electoral system in Hong Kong.






25/02/2021 



News Articles 





UK launches G7 Economic Resilience Panel
The G7 Economic Resilience Panel met formally for the first time on 24 February.













Media Contact
g7media@cabinetoffice.gov.uk
020 7276 9797
Public Correspondence
G7correspondence@cabinetoffice.gov.uk
Please check back regularly for further information and news about the UK’s G7 Presidency.



Follow Us




Credits
Designed & Built in Cornwall



 




Cookie Policy
Accessibility
Privacy Policy


Image Credits: Number 10, DIT, Adam Gibbard, Liwesta, Tom Fisk, BBC, National Maritime Museum Cornwall, Eden Project, Carbis Bay Estate


 











