






 



























Giving People a Fair Shot—Policies to Secure the Recovery












































 














English

عربي
中文
Français
日本語 
Русский
Español

































































About                                                    




FACTSHEETS


RESOURCES




IMF at a Glance
Surveillance
Lending


Capacity Development
IMF Factsheets List


IMF Members
IMF Timeline
Senior Officials


IMF Finances
Job Opportunities
Archives of the IMF



 


Research                                                    




Flagship Publications


Other Publications




World Economic Outlook
Global Financial Stability
Fiscal Monitor
External Sector


Staff Discussion Notes
Working Papers
IMF Research Perspectives
Economic Review


Global Housing Watch
Commodity Prices
Commodities Data Portal


IMF Researchers
Annual Research Conference
Other IMF Events



 


Countries                                                    




IMF reports and publications by country





Regional Offices




A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
Y
Z


IMF Resident Representative Offices 
IMF Regional Reports
IMF and Europe
IMF Members' Quotas and Voting Power, and Board of Governors


IMF Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific
IMF Capacity Development Office in Thailand (CDOT)
IMF Regional Office in Central America, Panama, and the Dominican Republic
Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU)
IMF Europe Office in Paris and Brussels 
IMF Office in the Pacific Islands



 


Capacity Development                                                    




About Us
What We Do
How We Work


IMF Training
Digital Training Catalog
Online Learning


Our Partners
Country Stories


Technical Assistance Country Reports
Strategy and Policies



 


News                                                    





All News




See Also




For Journalists






Country Focus
Communiqués
Mission Concluding Statements
Press Releases


Speeches
Statements at Donor Meetings
Transcripts
Views & Commentaries


IMFBlog
Article IV Consultations
Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)
Seminars, Conferences, & Other Events
E-mail Notification



Press Center
The IMF Press Center is a password-protected site for working journalists.

Login or  Register
Information of interest




 

Videos








About the IMF




Conferences




Press briefings




Speeches




Special Features






Africa




Americas




Asia




Europe




Middle East and Central Asia






Economic Outlook




Annual and spring meetings




Capacity Development

Most Recent
Most Popular




 


Data                                                    




IMF Finances
Additional Data Sources
World Economic Outlook Databases


Database
IMF eLibrary-Data
International Financial Statistics


Principal Global Indicators

Currency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange Reserves


Financial Access Survey



 


Publications                                                    




IMF eLibrary
IMF Bookstore
IMF Annual Report
Finance & Development


World Economic Outlook
Global Financial Stability Report
Fiscal Monitor
External Sector Report


Regional Economic Reports
Policy Papers
Staff Discussion Notes
Departmental Papers


All Notes Series
Spillover Notes
How-To Notes
Advanced search




 


COVID-19                                                    









                        Speech

                    











Resources


Kristalina Georgieva

 





News


Related Links

Speeches



Press Center
The IMF Press Center is a password-protected site for working journalists.
Press Center




Email notification sign-up
 Sign up to receive free e-mail notices when new series and/or country items are posted on the IMF website. 
 Modify your profile 
















العربية
español
français
日本語
русский
中文





Giving People a Fair Shot—Policies to Secure the Recovery
By Kristalina Georgieva, IMF Managing Director
Washington, DC

March 30, 2021


As prepared for delivery
1. Introduction: Promise and Danger


Thank you, Fareed, for the warm welcome, and thank you to Richard Haass and
the Council on Foreign Relations for bringing us together.


Our two institutions are connected by history and values: both founded at
global turning points, following global conflicts; both deeply committed to
a more peaceful and prosperous world.


Today we face another turning point. In the words of
Franklin D. Roosevelt: “The point in history at which we stand is full of promise and of danger.”
        [i]    


The good news is that the global economy is on firmer footing. Millions of
people are benefiting from vaccines that hold the promise of a
normal life, of embracing friends and loved ones.


But there is danger as well.


Economic fortunes are diverging. Vaccines are not yet available to everyone
and everywhere. Too many people continue to face job losses and rising
poverty. Too many countries are falling behind.


We must not let our guard down!


What we do now will shape the post-crisis world. So we must do the
right thing.


This means, above all, giving everyone a fair shot—a shot
in the arm, everywhere, to bring the pandemic to a durable end; and a shot
at a better future for vulnerable people and vulnerable countries to pave
the way to inclusive and sustainable recovery.


This will be the focus of our virtual Spring Meetings next week.


2. Global Outlook: Divergence and Uncertainty


Let’s look at the economic picture.


In January we projected global growth at 5.5 percent in 2021. We now expect
a further acceleration: partly because of additional policy
support—including the new fiscal package in the United States; and partly
because of the expected vaccine-powered recovery in many advanced economies
later this year.


This allows for an upward revision to our global forecast
for this year and for 2022, as you will see in our    World Economic Outlook next week.


How we got to this point is a tale of extraordinary effort: nurses
and doctors saving lives, essential workers supporting livelihoods,
scientists from around the world working together to create vaccines in
record time. And governments took exceptional measures—including about    $16 trillion in fiscal action and a massive liquidity
injection by central banks.


Without these synchronized measures, the global contraction last year would
have been at least three times worse. Just think about
it—this could have been another Great Depression. Also, we did not
have another global financial crisis—not just because of the
extraordinary measures, but also because countries had worked together over
the past decade to make banking systems more resilient.


And yet, while the outlook has improved overall, prospects are    diverging dangerously not only within nations but also across
countries and regions. In fact, what we see is a    multi-speed recovery, increasingly powered by two
engines—the US and China. They are part of a small group of countries that
will be well ahead of their pre-crisis GDP levels by the end of 2021.


But they are the exception, not the rule.


The cumulative loss in per capita income, relative to pre-crisis
projections, will be 11 percent in advanced economies by next year. For
emerging and developing countries, excluding China, the loss will be much
worse—at 20 percent, cutting one-fifth of
what is already a much smaller per capita income than in richer countries.


This loss of income means millions of people will face destitution,
homelessness, and hunger.


We see that clearly. But many other things are less clear. Indeed, one of
the greatest dangers facing us is extremely    high uncertainty.


So much depends on the path of the pandemic—which is now shaped by uneven
progress in vaccination and the new virus strains that are holding back
growth prospects, especially in Europe and Latin America.


There could also be more pressure coming to vulnerable    emerging market, low-income and fragile states. They
already have more limited fiscal firepower to fight the crisis. And many
are highly exposed to hard-hit sectors, such as tourism.


Now they face less access to vaccines and even less room in their budgets.
And some are already at high risk of debt distress in sovereign, corporate,
or banking sectors.


Add to this uncertainty over financial conditions. Accelerated recovery
brings good news overall, but it may also create some less desired
outcomes. For example, strong growth in the U.S. can benefit many countries
through increased trade. We expect inflation to remain contained, but
faster US recovery could cause a rapid rise in interest rates, which
could lead to a sharp tightening of financial conditions—and significant
capital outflows from emerging and developing economies.


This would pose major challenges especially to middle-income countries with large    external financing needs and elevated debt levels
. Many of those countries will need more support.


Return to growth would also mean policy transition, and the need to deal
with the long-term scars of this crisis—among them is the impact on human
capital, especially on the young, the low-skilled, women, and informal
workers.


Allowing those scars to persist will result in lower growth
potential—making it even more difficult to increase employment and reduce
inequality.


3. Strong Policy Action—to Give People a Fair Shot


It’s very clear: there will be no sustainable recovery without giving
people a fair shot.


What should be done?


First, we must keep our focus on escaping the crisis. We must follow the example of the scientists by stepping up cross-border
efforts, by doing whatever it takes to    ramp up vaccine production, distribution, and deployment.


One option is to pursue at the global level what has worked at the national
level—and that is subsidizing vaccine producers, input suppliers, and
“last-mile” distribution. The world needs a fair mechanism to redistribute
vaccines from surplus to deficit countries and a fully funded COVAX
facility to accelerate vaccination in poorer countries.


This is how we can protect people’s health—and accelerate the recovery.
Faster progress in ending the health crisis could add almost    $9 trillion to global GDP by 2025.


But the window of opportunity is closing fast. The longer it takes to speed
up vaccine production and rollout, the harder it will be to achieve these
gains.


Policies, of course, must be tailored to country-specific needs—their
pandemic exposure as well as economic factors.


While the crisis is still with us, the key is to help vulnerable households
and viable firms. This requires targeted fiscal measures—within
credible medium-term frameworks—as well as continued monetary
accommodation.


Given diverging recoveries, it is prudent to keep a close eye on financial
risk—including stretched asset valuations. And major central banks have to
carefully communicate their policy plans to prevent excess financial
volatility—at home and abroad. This would support vital capital flows,
especially to middle-income countries.


Second, we must safeguard the recovery
. As the pandemic recedes, government furlough and support programs should
be scaled back. But this transition needs to be carefully managed to
cushion the impact on workers—through income support, targeted hiring
subsidies, retraining and reskilling.


There should also be further support to viable small and medium-sized firms
through equity injections—and more effective bankruptcy procedures. SMEs
are the world’s biggest employer. Yet our research shows that the share of
insolvent SMEs could rise sharply this year as support is scaled
back—threatening one in ten jobs in this vital sector.
        [ii]    


Most emerging and developing countries have relatively weaker bankruptcy
procedures, which means they would be more heavily affected by a wave of
insolvencies. So we need further reforms to mitigate these economic
scars—and promote a fairer transition.


Third, invest in the future. 
The crisis has made the case for pandemic preparedness and—more broadly—for
investing in resilience, especially to climate shocks. A new momentum is
building towards greener, smarter, and more inclusive economies.


So far, only a small fraction of fiscal stimulus has been directed to
climate and green finance. But the tide is turning, and rightly so.


A coordinated green infrastructure push, combined with carbon pricing,
could boost global GDP in the next 15 years by 0.7 percent
—and create millions of jobs.
        [iii]    


There is also the potential of digitalization. In a recent survey
        [iv], almost 50 percent of shoppers said they were using digital payments more
than before the pandemic. A growing number of central banks are considering
digital currencies
        [v]    
—which could transform the international monetary system. And digital
infrastructure investment could help transform our economic system—boosting
productivity and living standards.


To unlock this potential, we need to combine better infrastructure and
greater access to the internet with more investment in people’s education
and health. This requires sufficient public revenues and national tax
systems retooled for the 21st century. In many cases, this will
mean making them more progressive—and fairer.


This has to be coupled with modernizing international corporate taxation
through multilateral efforts—to ensure that highly profitable firms pay
their fair share where they do business. This will also help strengthen
public finances, especially in poorer countries.


All this is essential. But it will only take us so far.


The harsh reality is that poorer nations are at risk of missing out on what
is a historic transformation to a new global economy built on green and
digital foundations.


New IMF research
        [vi]    
—released today—shows that low-income countries have to
deploy some $200 billion over five years just to fight the
pandemic. And then another $250 billion to return to the
path of catching up to higher income levels.


They can cover only a portion of that on their own. Success would call for
a comprehensive effort—more domestic revenue mobilization, more
external concessional financing, and more help to deal with debt. The G20
Debt Service Suspension Initiative and new Common Framework are a good
start.


For its part, the IMF has stepped up in an unprecedented way. We have
provided over $107 billion in new financing to 85 countries and debt service relief for    29 of our poorest members. In Sub-Saharan Africa, IMF
financing last year was about 13 times more than the
annual average over the previous decade.


And I am very encouraged that support is building among the IMF’s
membership for a possible SDR allocation of    $650 billion. This would benefit all our members,
but especially the most vulnerable, by boosting reserves without adding to
debt burdens. It will send a powerful signal of multilateral
solidarity—freeing up resources for vaccination programs and other urgent
needs.


Just as we have helped fight the crisis, we will help our members secure
the recovery.


4. Conclusion


Let me end as I began—with FDR. On February 12, 1945, he called on the U.S
Congress to adopt the Bretton Woods Agreement, which created the IMF and
the World Bank.


He said: “The world will either move toward unity and widely shared prosperity or
it will move apart. We have a chance to use our influence in favor of a
more united and cooperating world.”


These words could not be more apt today when we face the biggest test of
our generation. How we work together to build a better world will be
remembered for generations to come.


Let’s give it a fair shot.







[i]

Franklin D. Roosevelt’s

Message to Congress

on the Bretton Woods Agreements (Feb. 12, 1945).





[ii]

IMF Staff Discussion Note (to be published, April 2021):

Insolvency Prospects Among Small-and-Medium-Sized Enterprises
in Advanced Economies: Assessment and Policy Options

.





[iii]

IMF’s World Economic Outlook (October 2020), Chapter 3:
“Mitigating Climate Change.”





[iv]


Report

: Global Online Payment Methods 2020 and COVID-19's Impact.





[v]

A February 2021 survey of IMF desk economists suggests that in 70
percent of 159 countries, central banks are either analyzing the
implications of, currently experimenting with, piloting, or likely
to issue a central bank digital currency (CBDC) in the short to
medium run.





[vi]

IMF Board paper (March 2021):

Macroeconomic Developments and Prospects in Low-Income
Countries 2021

.




IMF Communications Department
MEDIA RELATIONS
PRESS OFFICER: 
Phone: +1 202 623-7100Email: MEDIA@IMF.org
@IMFSpokesperson








 















About
Research
Countries
Capacity Development
News
Events


Videos
Data
Publications
Social Media Hub
Annual Report
Copyright and Usage


Privacy Policy
Contact Us
Careers
Glossary
Scam Alert


عربي
中文
Français
日本語
Русский
Español





© 2021 International Monetary Fund. All rights reserved.













































 














