






 



























Global Economy 2021: Prospects and Challenges 






































 














English

عربي
中文
Français
日本語 
Русский
Español

































































About                                                    




FACTSHEETS


RESOURCES




IMF at a Glance
Surveillance
Lending


Capacity Development
IMF Factsheets List


IMF Members
IMF Timeline
Senior Officials


IMF Finances
Job Opportunities
Archives of the IMF



 


Research                                                    




Flagship Publications


Other Publications




World Economic Outlook
Global Financial Stability
Fiscal Monitor
External Sector


Staff Discussion Notes
Working Papers
IMF Research Perspectives
Economic Review


Global Housing Watch
Commodity Prices
Commodities Data Portal


IMF Researchers
Annual Research Conference
Other IMF Events



 


Countries                                                    




IMF reports and publications by country





Regional Offices




A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
Y
Z


IMF Resident Representative Offices 
IMF Regional Reports
IMF and Europe
IMF Members' Quotas and Voting Power, and Board of Governors


IMF Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific
IMF Capacity Development Office in Thailand (CDOT)
IMF Regional Office in Central America, Panama, and the Dominican Republic
Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU)
IMF Europe Office in Paris and Brussels 
IMF Office in the Pacific Islands



 


Capacity Development                                                    




About Us
What We Do
How We Work


IMF Training
Digital Training Catalog
Online Learning


Our Partners
Country Stories


Technical Assistance Country Reports
Strategy and Policies



 


News                                                    





All News




See Also




For Journalists






Country Focus
Communiqués
Mission Concluding Statements
Press Releases


Speeches
Statements at Donor Meetings
Transcripts
Views & Commentaries


IMFBlog
Article IV Consultations
Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)
Seminars, Conferences, & Other Events
E-mail Notification



Press Center
The IMF Press Center is a password-protected site for working journalists.

Login or  Register
Information of interest




 

Videos








About the IMF




Conferences




Press briefings




Speeches




Special Features






Africa




Americas




Asia




Europe




Middle East and Central Asia






Economic Outlook




Annual and spring meetings




Capacity Development

Most Recent
Most Popular




 


Data                                                    




IMF Finances
Additional Data Sources
World Economic Outlook Databases


Database
IMF eLibrary-Data
International Financial Statistics


Principal Global Indicators

Currency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange Reserves


Financial Access Survey



 


Publications                                                    




IMF eLibrary
IMF Bookstore
IMF Annual Report
Finance & Development


World Economic Outlook
Global Financial Stability Report
Fiscal Monitor
External Sector Report


Regional Economic Reports
Policy Papers
Staff Discussion Notes
Departmental Papers


All Notes Series
Spillover Notes
How-To Notes
Advanced search




 


COVID-19                                                    









                        Speech

                    








Resources

Geoffrey W.S. Okamoto


News


Related Links


People's Republic of China and the IMF

Speeches



Press Center
The IMF Press Center is a password-protected site for working journalists.
Press Center




Email notification sign-up
 Sign up to receive free e-mail notices when new series and/or country items are posted on the IMF website. 
 Modify your profile 















Global Economy 2021: Prospects and Challenges 
Geoffrey Okamoto, First Deputy Managing Director, IMF
China Development Forum (session V venue I)
March 20, 2021

Dear Director-General Yu, thank you very much for inviting me to
speak at this year’s China Development Forum. The topic of the country’s
role in the “New Journey of Modernization” is an important one for the
world.


Let me start with the outlook for the global economy and for China and
highlight key policy priorities for the period ahead.


Global Outlook


In January, we projected 2021 global growth at 5.5 percent, but    prospects of a stronger recovery are emerging –
because of additional fiscal stimulus, especially in the U.S., and the
prospects of broader vaccination.


We will update our global forecasts in the new    World Economic Outlook coming out in early April.





However, the global recovery has been    incomplete and unequal.





It is incomplete  because despite a stronger than expected recovery
in the second half of 2020, GDP remains well below pre-pandemic trends in
most countries.


The recovery paths have also been different across countries, as well as across sectors.


China
, in many ways, has already completed its recovery, returning to its
pre-pandemic growth levels ahead of all large economies. But growth still
lacks balance, with private consumption lagging investment. We expect consumption will catch up, as investment growth normalizes. But
there are significant risks which I will describe momentarily.


Growing gap 


Outside of China, though, there are worrying signs that the

gap between advanced economies and emerging markets is growing.


We project that cumulative income per capita in emerging and developing
countries, excluding China, between 2020 and 2022 will be 22 percent lower
than what it would have been without the pandemic.


That will translate into close to 90 million people falling below the    extreme poverty threshold since the pandemic started.


China
has been a bright spot in its continued fight against poverty, but even
there the pandemic has hurt vulnerable people the most.


Exceptional Uncertainty 


As I said, uncertainty about the recovery is    exceptionally large.


We don’t know how prolonged the health crisis will be.    Access to vaccines remains very uneven, both
across advanced and emerging economies.


Low-income countries might not see significant vaccination well into 2022,
and that is a problem: this pandemic will only really be over when it is
over for everyone.


Another risk is the spread of resistant mutations
that threatens to reduce the efficacy of current vaccines and could
undermine or delay the recovery.


Besides these bigger issues, there are also uncertainties about the


effectiveness of policy actions and differences in what countries
can do. Some countries face    limited fiscal space and higher debts. While
China still has some room for maneuver, many others, especially low-income
countries, do not.


Tighter financial conditions
could exacerbate vulnerabilities in countries with high public and private
debt. We have seen recent increases in bond yields as the growth outlook of
some advanced economies improves, leading markets to expect an earlier
withdrawal of monetary stimulus.


In the medium-term, the crisis could leave deep scars. In the past,
advanced economies have seen their output reduced almost 5 percent below
pre-recession trends five years after the beginning of a recession. It
could be worse in countries that cannot afford a strong macroeconomic
response and/or have large services sectors more affected by the pandemic. Everywhere, the crisis has had    a disproportionate impact on the young, the
low-skilled, and women. 


In the long-term
, rising carbon emission levels remind us that    climate change is also a significant challenge,
and Asia has a major role in addressing it.





The way forward


These challenges are daunting, but they can be overcome with concerted
actions by all countries. Let me highlight three priorities.





First, end the pandemic swiftly. The international community must swiftly ramp up vaccine production. We
must ensure that low-income countries have the financing to procure and
distribute vaccines. This requires bolstering funding for the COVAX
initiative and the logistics for delivery.





On this front, we ask that leading economies support vaccine production and
provide finance to developing countries.





Second, countries should maintain economic support and    calibrate it to the stage of their recovery and
the pandemic. Where the pandemic continues, the priority is to protect
lives and livelihoods. As it wanes, support should become more targeted,
focusing on mitigating scarring, supporting the reallocation of resources,
and ensuring that the post-pandemic economy is an inclusive and sustainable
one.


The best policies will be those that support the recovery, help strengthen
resilience, and tackle long-standing challenges. For example, foster the
transition to green energy and digitalization.





In China, the policies announced during the “Two Sessions”
meetings to strengthen high-quality growth, rein in carbon emissions, and
improve energy efficiency should support China’s quest to rebalance its
growth model towards greener and more consumption-oriented growth.


Achieving faster and higher-quality growth requires mutually enhancing
reforms: strengthening social safety nets and green investment; opening up
of domestic markets; continuing to reform state companies; and ensuring
that private and government-owned firms can compete on an equal basis. A
strong effort in this direction will raise productivity and income, and
lead to more balanced and consumption-driven growth.


Third, we must    mitigate divergence across countries. This
includes providing access to liquidity for developing economies and
preventing climate change from hampering their economic growth and
convergence.





IMF support 


We at the IMF have been active as never before in supporting our
membership. We have expanded concessional financing and     provided debt relief to many of our
poorest members.


A new SDR allocation is under consideration to
help address the global long-term need for reserves.


We have also worked with the G20 on bilateral debt service relief through
the Debt Service Suspension Initiative and on a    Common Framework to address unsustainable
sovereign debt.


Lastly, we are incorporating climate change into
our country and financial risk assessments, while scaling up    capacity development.





We appreciate China’s continuing support to all these endeavors.





Let me conclude by saying that the international community must come
together and help each other to end this pandemic and lay the foundation
for a more balanced, inclusive, and sustained global recovery for all.


Thank you very much!


IMF Communications Department
MEDIA RELATIONS
PRESS OFFICER: 
Phone: +1 202 623-7100Email: MEDIA@IMF.org
@IMFSpokesperson








 















About
Research
Countries
Capacity Development
News
Events


Videos
Data
Publications
Social Media Hub
Annual Report
Copyright and Usage


Privacy Policy
Contact Us
Careers
Glossary
Scam Alert


عربي
中文
Français
日本語
Русский
Español





© 2021 International Monetary Fund. All rights reserved.













































 














