


Corporate Boards are Critical Starting Points for Implementing Stakeholder Capitalism  > Press releases | World Economic Forum

































































Agenda


Platforms


Reports


Events


Videos




 English
              

 English
              




English


Español


Français


中文


日本語









Sign In

 







This site uses cookies to deliver website functionality and analytics. If you would like to know more about the types of cookies we serve and how to change your cookie settings, please read our Cookie Notice. By clicking the "I accept" button, you consent to the use of these cookies.

I accept














Agenda


Platforms


Reports


Events


Videos








      English
    


English


Español


Français


中文


日本語








                Sign-in
              





























Media
News Releases

Corporate Boards are Critical Starting Points for Implementing Stakeholder Capitalism 







          Published
        
13 Jan 2021



          2021
        

            Share
          










































Madeleine Hillyer, US Media Relations, World Economic Forum, +1 646 592 5044 mhll@weforum.org 



COVID-19 has put renewed pressure on and increased scrutiny towards companies to ensure they are considering the needs of all stakeholders
While there is continued momentum to support the principles of stakeholder capitalism, many companies face practical issues to including non-financial considerations in their business models and practices
A new study from the World Economic Forum highlights practical tools boardrooms can use to implement stakeholder capitalism, such as having a clear purpose, adopting common ESG metrics and enhancing board diversity
Read the study here



New York, USA 13 January 2021– COVID-19 has led to global and systemic economic, social and environmental disruption, and an increasing number of companies are recognizing the need for pragmatic approaches to implement the principles of stakeholder capitalism. 


A new white paper, The Future of the Corporation: Moving from Balance Sheet to Value Sheet, provides analysis about the important role boardrooms and corporate governance play in addressing the environmental, social and governance (ESG) challenges their companies face. Focusing on practical tools for corporate leaders, the white paper, produced in collaboration with Baker McKenzie, provides a set of actions and stakeholder governance considerations boardrooms can take to reshape their company’s purpose and practices. 


This includes leadership-level actions, such as aligning company purpose and incentives with transparent goals and KPIs, increasing board diversity and adopting the common stakeholder capitalism metrics to measure and manage global risks and opportunities related to business, society and the planet. 


“Business leaders are increasingly implementing business models that create value based on stakeholder needs,” said Klaus Schwab, Founder and Executive Chairman, World Economic Forum. “While there’s increasing momentum towards stakeholder capitalism, many businesses are also looking for practical solutions to help them fully understand and address the concerns of all their stakeholders. The Forum is committed to providing measurement and governance tools that will help these leaders succeed, thereby advancing stakeholder capitalism globally.”


Effectively aligning a company’s practices with its purpose is another key role boardrooms must play when integrating stakeholder interests into their business models. Setting clear metrics for management, which align with company purpose is an important step for boards. 


Ørsted, a company who successfully transformed its business from fossil fuels to renewable energy, is a clear example of how effective governance is critical to company-wide transformation For example, in its transition to being a sustainable business, Ørsted made it a board-level priority to ensure its transformation was transparent, the journey was measured with concrete metrics and it was communicated to all relevant stakeholders. 


"The pandemic, climate and inequality challenges of the last year were and continue to be unprecedented. Against this backdrop, how can companies drive long-term value creation and sustainable growth? A good stakeholder governance framework will help companies mitigate risk, build resilience and enjoy sustainable value creation and long-term success; at the heart of good stakeholder governance is clearly understanding who key stakeholders are, engaging with them and bringing their voice into decision-making,” said Beatriz Araujo, Head of Corporate Governance, Baker McKenzie. She added: “There is no ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach; each company must embark on its own stakeholder governance journey and we have suggested some of the steps companies should consider taking on such a journey.” 


In addition to the examples above, the white paper provides a stakeholder governance framework centred around four key areas of four key areas of leadership focus. These are:


1) Purpose 


Purpose is returning centre stage as an enabler for long-term sustainable value creation for corporate success. 


Boards should ensure their companies have a clear and well understood purpose, informed by their key stakeholders' expectations, and regularly use this purpose as a guide in their strategic decision-making.


2) Strategy


Corporate leaders should ensure their company’s strategy is robust and designed to deliver the company’s purpose. 


This strategy needs to be flexible to take account of changing stakeholder considerations. Periodic ESG risk and opportunity assessments are a tool that leaders can use to ensure they are pursuing an appropriate strategy in light of changing externalities and stakeholder feedback.


3) Culture/Values


A company’s culture and values are important in ensuring decisions and daily business practices appropriately reflect their stated purpose. 


4) Governance 


Effective governance, which regularly addresses stakeholder input, is critical for running a sustainable, resilient business. 


Board composition, diversity and inclusion are important factors in ensuring boardrooms are equipped with the skills needed adequately understand and consider the needs of their stakeholders. 


Along with input from the Forum’s Community of Chairpersons, the whitepaper is based on interviews with senior leaders at bp, the Cambridge University Institute for Sustainability Leadership, Fidelity International and Ørsted.


Notes to editors Read more about the Future of the Corporation and the Future of Investing Platform  View Forum photos Read the Forum Agenda also in French | Spanish | Mandarin | Japanese Become a fan of the Forum on Facebook Watch Forum videos Follow the Forum on Twitter via @wef @davos | Instagram | LinkedIn | TikTok | Weibo | Podcasts  Learn about the Forum’s impact Subscribe to Forum news releases and Podcast 




          Share
        








































All opinions expressed are those of the author. The World Economic Forum Blog is an independent and neutral platform dedicated to generating debate around the key topics that shape global, regional and industry agendas.










Subscribe to our Press Releases











Follow Us















About



Our Mission


The Davos Manifesto


Careers


Strategic Intelligence


Contact Us


Code of Conduct


World Economic Forum LLC


Sustainability


Leadership and Governance


World Economic Forum Privacy Policy 


Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution


New Champions


Our Partners


Our Impact


Communities


History


Centre for Cybersecurity


Klaus Schwab


Global Innovators


Pictures







Media



News


Accreditation


Subscribe to our news







Members & Partners



Member login to TopLink


Strategic Partners' area


Partner Institutes' area







Global sites



Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution


Open Forum


Global Shapers


Schwab Foundation for Social Entrepreneurship


Young Global Leaders


Strategic Intelligence


Global Risks


UpLink Platform



EN
ES FR 中文 日本語









            © 2021 World Economic Forum
          

Privacy Policy & Terms of Service































