




















Online Event: Biden’s Blueprint on Beijing: Transitioning to a New Approach on China’s Economy | Center for Strategic and International Studies

















































Skip to main content






Sections
Search






Center for Strategic & International Studies



  User menu 
Subscribe
Sign In

 



  Topics 
Climate Change
Cybersecurity and TechnologyCybersecurity
Data Governance
Intelligence, Surveillance, and Privacy
Military Technology
Space
Technology and Innovation

Defense and SecurityCounterterrorism and Homeland Security
Defense Budget
Defense Industry, Acquisition, and Innovation
Defense Strategy and Capabilities
Geopolitics and International Security
Long-Term Futures
Missile Defense
Space
Weapons of Mass Destruction Proliferation

EconomicsAsian Economics
Global Economic Governance
Trade and International Business

Energy and SustainabilityEnergy, Climate Change, and Environmental Impacts
Energy and Geopolitics
Energy Innovation
Energy Markets, Trends, and Outlooks

Global HealthFamily Planning, Maternal and Child Health, and Immunizations
Multilateral Institutions
Health and Security
Infectious Disease

Human RightsCivil Society
Transitional Justice
Human Security

International DevelopmentFood and Agriculture
Governance and Rule of Law
Humanitarian Assistance
Human Mobility
Private Sector Development
U.S. Development Policy


 Regions 
AfricaNorth Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa

AmericasCaribbean
North America
South America

Arctic
AsiaAfghanistan
Australia, New Zealand & Pacific
China
India
Japan
Korea
Pakistan
Southeast Asia

EuropeEuropean Union
NATO
Post-Soviet Europe
Turkey

Middle EastThe Gulf
Egypt and the Levant
North Africa

Russia and EurasiaThe South Caucasus
Central Asia
Post-Soviet Europe
Russia


 Sections menu 
Programs
Experts
Events
AnalysisBlogs
Books
Commentary
Congressional Testimony
Critical Questions
Interactive Reports
Journals
Newsletter
Reports
Transcript

Podcasts
iDeas Lab
Transcripts
Web Projects

 Main menu 
About Us
Support CSISSecuring Our Future


 


 

    Photo: LINTAO ZHANG/AFP/Getty Images  


 
CSIS PRESENTS
Embedded video
 



 Past Event 
 
Share
 LinkedIn
Facebook
Twitter
Email
Printfriendly.com
 
  

Online Event: Biden’s Blueprint on Beijing:  Transitioning to a New Approach on China’s Economy
 Thursday, January 21, 2021 1:00 pm - 2:00 pm Ask Live Questions Here
The event will be webcast live from this page.
In the last four years, America’s China policy has shifted away from patient multilateralism and integration toward impatient unilateralism and decoupling. Some believe that there is little room for maneuver by the incoming Biden administration to adjust China policy because of Beijing’s intransigence and a flurry of actions adopted in the waning months of the Trump administration, which together lock in strategic rivalry. Others believe there is more opportunity for policy innovation than meets the eye, particularly if US-China relations are viewed through broader adjustments in the administration’s overall domestic and foreign policy frameworks. In this roundtable discussion, a panel of leading experts from the Trustee Chair — Scott Kennedy, Claire Reade, Daniel H. Rosen, and John L. Holden — will discuss the legacy of the Trump administration's policies, the relative trajectory of the Chinese and American economies, the impact of domestic politics in both countries, and the Biden administration’s various options. On this foundation, they will also offer their own proposals for how to build an effective strategy on commercial issues involving China. 
This event is made possible by general support to CSIS.
Related Trustee Chair Work:
Opinion: Scott Kennedy, "For China, offering Biden a plastic olive branch would be worse than doing nothing," November 16, 2020.
Commentary: Claire Reade, "Trade May Still Be the Ballast in U.S.-China Relations - At Least for Now," August 10, 2020.
Commentary: John L. Holden, "U.S.-China Relations and COVID-19: What Can Be Done Now," March 20, 2020.
Commentary: Scott Kennedy and Daniel H. Rosen, "Market Metrics: A Fact-Based Approach to the Chinese Economic Challenge," October 19, 2019.
Commentary: Daniel H. Rosen and Scott Kennedy, "Building a Better Deal with China," January 28, 2019.

CSIS Experts

 




Twitter




Scott Kennedy
Senior Adviser and Trustee Chair in Chinese Business and Economics


 




Claire Reade
Senior Associate (Non-resident), Trustee Chair in Chinese Business and Economics


 




Daniel H. Rosen
Senior Associate (Non-resident), Trustee Chair in Chinese Business and Economics


 




John L. Holden
Senior Associate (Non-resident), Trustee Chair in Chinese Business and Economics



 

 
Media Queries
 Contact H. Andrew Schwartz Chief Communications Officer Tel: 202.775.3242
 Contact Caleb Diamond Media Relations Manager and Editorial Associate Tel: 202.775.3173


 
Related
Asia, China, Chinese Business and Economics, Economics, Trade and International Business 

  
 
Related Content
 
 
Commentary



A Complex Inheritance: Transitioning to a New Approach on China
By Scott Kennedy
January 19, 2021


 
On Demand Event



Confronting Chinese State Capitalism
February 16, 2021


 
On Demand Event



Beyond the Brink: the U.S.-China Trade War
September 25, 2019


 
Blog Post



America’s Huawei Challenges
By Scott Kennedy
In Trustee China Hand
July 31, 2020


 
On Demand Event



Online Event: The China Economic Risk Matrix: Pinpointing the Dangers in China’s Financial System
September 22, 2020


 
Report



Cheap Talk: China’s Central Bank Still Struggles to Speak to Markets
By Scott Kennedy
February 8, 2021


 
Blog Post



China’s Planners Succeed, but What About China?
By Scott Kennedy
In Trustee China Hand
November 11, 2020


 
Report



The Coming NEV War? Implications of China’s Advances in Electric Vehicles
By Scott Kennedy
November 18, 2020




 



  Footer menu 
Topics
Regions
Programs
Experts
Events
Analysis
Web Projects
Podcasts
iDeas Lab
Transcripts
About Us
Support Us

 
  Contact CSIS Email CSIS
Tel: 202.887.0200
Fax: 202.775.3199
 Visit CSIS Headquarters 1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
 Media Queries Contact H. Andrew Schwartz Chief Communications Officer Tel: 202.775.3242
 Contact Caleb Diamond Media Relations Manager and Editorial Associate Tel: 202.775.3173

 
  Daily Updates Sign up to receive The Evening, a daily brief on the news, events, and people shaping the world of international affairs.Subscribe to CSIS Newsletters  Follow CSIS 
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
YouTube
Instagram


 

All content © 2021. All rights reserved.
Legal menu 
Credits
Privacy Policy
Reprint Permissions




 

