


Majority Optimistic About Tech in 2021, But Health, Jobs and Environment Top Personal Risk List > Press releases | World Economic Forum

































































Agenda


Platforms


Reports


Events


Videos




 English
              

 English
              




English


Español


Français


中文


日本語









Sign In

 







This site uses cookies to deliver website functionality and analytics. If you would like to know more about the types of cookies we serve and how to change your cookie settings, please read our Cookie Notice. By clicking the "I accept" button, you consent to the use of these cookies.

I accept














Agenda


Platforms


Reports


Events


Videos








      English
    


English


Español


Français


中文


日本語








                Sign-in
              





























Media
News Releases

Majority Optimistic About Tech in 2021, But Health, Jobs and Environment Top Personal Risk List







          Published
        
22 Jan 2021



          2021
        

            Share
          










































Amanda Russo, Public Engagement, arus@weforum.org, +41 79 392 6898



A 28-country World Economic Forum/Ipsos survey found a majority of adults think accessing digital tools, training or technology will improve in the year ahead
But, most view deteriorating mental and physical health, loss of income or employment, and more frequent weather-related natural disasters as the biggest personal risks
Now more than ever, public and private institutions must come together, rebuild trust and address the changes needed following the COVID-19 pandemic
The Davos Agenda will bring together G7 and G20 heads of state, chief executives and leaders from civil society to discuss how to catalyze impact on a global level in a crucial year ahead
View more details about the survey and its findings



Geneva, Switzerland, 22 January 2021 — A new World Economic Forum/Ipsos survey found most adults are optimistic about accessing technology, digital tools and training in the next 12 months, but have serious concerns about the state of the climate, job market and global health. These findings ahead of the Davos Agenda week highlight the importance of leaders across the public and private sectors coming together to address the changes needed in a crucial year ahead. 


According to the survey, the percentage of those expecting the availability of digital tools and technology to improve in 2021 exceeds the percentage of those who think it will get worse across geographies. This is most of all the case in Saudi Arabia (by 57 points), Peru (55 points), and India (48 points). Italy is the only country where, while the proportion of optimists is greater than that of pessimists by 3 points, the difference is not statistically significant. 


Significantly larger proportions of people expect opportunities for training and education to improve in 2021 than to get worse in 12 countries — most of all in Saudi Arabia (by 45 points), Peru (44 points), Mexico (36 points), and China (36 points).



Click to enlarge



                Image: IPSOS/World Economic Forum
              




However, there are global concerns with deteriorating health, loss of income or employment, and more frequent weather-related natural disasters - each perceived as a real threat by three out of five adults across the world.


Pessimists outnumber optimists on the other five issues measured: The pace of climate change (by 20 points); Employment opportunities (by 15 points); General health conditions (by 5 points); Inequality (by 4 points), and Relations between one’s country and other countries (by 2 points).






                Expected Change in 2021
              

                Image: IPSOS/World Economic Forum
              




The pandemic has accelerated systemic changes that were apparent before its inception. The fault lines that emerged in 2020 now appear as critical crossroads in 2021. The Davos Agenda will help leaders choose innovative and bold solutions to stem the pandemic and drive a robust recovery over the next year.In regards to the Davos Agenda, Professor Klaus Schwab, Founder and Executive Chairman of the World Economic Forum said: “In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, the need to reset priorities and the urgency to reform systems have been growing stronger around the world. Rebuilding trust and increasing global cooperation are crucial to fostering innovative and bold solutions to stem the pandemic and drive a robust recovery. This unique meeting will be an opportunity for leaders to outline their vision and address the most important issues of our time, such as the need to accelerate job creation and to protect the environment.”


Methodology 


These are the results of a 28-country survey conducted by Ipsos on its Global Advisor online platform. Ipsos interviewed a total of 23,004 adults aged 18-74 in United States, Canada, Malaysia, South Africa, and Turkey, 21-74 in Singapore, and 16-74 in 22 other countries between Wednesday, December 23, 2020 and Friday January 8, 2021.


Where results do not sum to 100 or the ‘difference’ appears to be +/-1 more/less than the actual, this may be due to rounding, multiple responses or the exclusion of don't knows or not stated responses


About Ipsos


Ipsos is the world’s third largest market research company, present in 90 markets and employing more than 18,000 people. Founded in France in 1975, Ipsos is listed on the Euronext Paris since July 1st, 1999. The company is part of the SBF 120 and the Mid-60 index and is eligible for the Deferred Settlement Service (SRD).


Note to EditorsView more details How to follow and watch sessions at The Davos AgendaThe Davos Agenda Registration for MediaLearn about the Forum’s impact Check out Forum videos | photosFacebook | Twitter | Instagram | LinkedIn | TikTok | Weibo | PodcastsRead the Forum Agenda (also in French | Spanish | Mandarin | Japanese)Subscribe to News releases and PodcastsExplore the Forum’s Strategic Intelligence Platform and Transformation Maps


The World Economic Forum, committed to improving the state of the world, is the International Organization for Public-Private Cooperation.


The Forum engages the foremost political, business and other leaders of society to shape global, regional and industry agendas. (www.weforum.org).




          Share
        








































All opinions expressed are those of the author. The World Economic Forum Blog is an independent and neutral platform dedicated to generating debate around the key topics that shape global, regional and industry agendas.










Subscribe to our Press Releases











Follow Us















About



Our Mission


The Davos Manifesto


Careers


Strategic Intelligence


Contact Us


Code of Conduct


World Economic Forum LLC


Sustainability


Leadership and Governance


World Economic Forum Privacy Policy 


Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution


New Champions


Our Partners


Our Impact


Communities


History


Centre for Cybersecurity


Klaus Schwab


Global Innovators


Pictures







Media



News


Accreditation


Subscribe to our news







Members & Partners



Member login to TopLink


Strategic Partners' area


Partner Institutes' area







Global sites



Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution


Open Forum


Global Shapers


Schwab Foundation for Social Entrepreneurship


Young Global Leaders


Strategic Intelligence


Global Risks


UpLink Platform



EN
ES FR 中文 日本語









            © 2021 World Economic Forum
          

Privacy Policy & Terms of Service































